On the Persistence of Groove:
Structural Fog and Jouissance in a “Split Open and Melt” Jam

Steven Reale


Introduction (“The Overhead View”1)


It may be that one of the greatest frustrations for the Phishhead is the perceptual gulf that exists between fans and their family and friends who, for some reason, cannot seem to understand how great this band is!2 Where throngs of the devoted hear transcendent bliss in the peaks and valleys of a Phish jam, the uninitiated seem to only perceive nonsense: both in the silliness of the lyrics and in the cacophony of the improvisations. This chapter examines the band’s improvisational style, considering as a case study their May 7, 1994 performance of “Split Open and Melt” (“SoaM”) at the Bomb Factory in Dallas, TX.3 Bringing together groove theory with Lacanian psychoanalysis, this chapter offers a phenomenological model for listening to Phish that posits an explanation for why fans find their jams to be so uniquely pleasurable. Moreover, by positioning that account within the existing groove discourse, it offers a synthesis of an existing dialectic between groove-based and non-groove-based musics and an analytical technique that can be generalized to other groove performances. Finally, the chapter offers a practical suggestion for how Phish fans might share their love of the band with others.
	Like the sky, the chapter is divided in two: Part I presents the phenomenological model of the present SoaM while surveying the discourse of groove theory, with a particular focus on psychoanalytic perspectives on groove. In the interest of accessibility, Part I presents its account of the groove without addressing the detailed analytical machinery used to construct it. Part II, then, dives into the details, offering a primer for each parameter, and exemplifying analyses of three selected loops. The most pertinent contributions to the Phish discourse—narrowly—and the groove discourse—more broadly—appear in Part I, so that readers without a background or interest in musical analysis can skip Part II without missing the chapter’s principal takeaways. 

Part I: The Phenomenology of the Groove (“Dancing in My Head”4)

Grooving on groove (“Let the Music Do the Talking”5)

      Scholars of groove often delineate two meanings for the term, the first relating to the immanent musical elements of a performance. One of the earliest scholars of the subject, Charles Keil, describes groove as “an intuitive sense of style as process, a perception of a cycle in motion, a form or organizing pattern being revealed, a recurrent clustering of elements through time.”6 Music theorist Mark Spicer specifies this elements, particularly in a pop-rock context, as the “the tapestry of riffs – usually played by the drums, bass, rhythm guitar and/or keyboard … – that work together to create the distinctive rhythmic/harmonic backdrop which identifies a song.”7 
	The second meaning of groove refers to its social element, how it exists within a network of participants,8 and this second meaning can be further bifurcated. On the one hand, Keil writes that “‘Getting into the groove’ describes how a socialized listener anticipates pattern in a style, and feelingfully participates by momentarily tracking and appreciating subtleties vis-á-vis overt regularities.” Here, an acculturated listener will be able to internalize—and often physicalize through dance and other gestures—a groove’s repetitions and draws pleasure when performers play in momentary conflict against them. In this sense of the phrase, the listener “gets into the groove” established by the performing musicians.
      On the other hand, Keil describes “getting into the groove” as the process by which in any particular performance, “a seasoned performer structures and maintains a perceptible coherence.”9 Amplifying the idea, ethnomusicologist Ingrid Monson argues that groove’s recurrent clustering of elements create a baseline musical structure that affords coherence to a performance as it develops through time.10  Groove becomes, then, “a collectively produced sense of time against which … musicians converse.”11 In this sense of the phrase, musicians “get into the groove” with each other. Critically, in both senses of the phrase, “getting into the groove” is a social phenomenon that engages with a community surrounding it—of musicians and listeners at a particular performance, to be sure, but also a wider community of performers and listeners participating in groove’s musical discourse more generally.
      Our first step, then, is to establish the baseline musical structure for SoaM jams. Figure X.1 is an annotated musical reduction of the SoaM groove as it appears on the studio album Lawn Boy.12 The groove is established at the 3:34 mark and serves as the basic structure for the jam that follows. There are numerous musical parameters that contribute to the basic groove, but to keep the scope of this study manageable I restrict my focus to four: pitch, beat, hypermeter, and the “hook” that connects the end of the cycle back to the beginning. Part 2 offers a primer for each of these terms.
<INSERT FIGURE X.1 HERE>
      Although it entails repetition, to groove is not to mindlessly repeat a collection of rhythmic and melodic elements and call it a performance; rather, the groove is a backdrop—like a painter’s blank canvas—for a performance that will develop, grow, and change. In the live SoaM, the band establishes that backdrop by performing a few normal loops through Figure X.1’s basic structure a few times, then spend the next nine minutes dismantling it. The result is a musical texture in conflict with itself, one where at several points, the musicians almost entirely abandon the groove. At these moments, a chaotic, unpredictable cacophony dominates the performance, producing an intense musical effect that persists until the band “snaps back” into the groove—a kind of “structural fog” surrounds these moments, creating a musical intensity that abates when the fog clears and the groove reasserts itself.
      Crucially, even when the musicians deviate the most from the groove, they must still be tracking its structure, hearing it and performing against it in absentia, in order that they may all snap back into it, clearing the fog in unison at precisely the moment when a new loop is temporally due to begin. Just as a circus acrobat wows an audience by performing a feat and then repeating it sans safety harness, here, Phish’s musical conversation begins with the band first getting in the groove, and then letting go of it, “limb by limb,”13 as it were, daring themselves to abandon it further and further. 
      Monson writes that in groove-based improvisation, “The unpredictable may be euphoric or anxiety-producing (such as the fear of getting lost), but the mixture of expectation and willful departure traded around the bandstand is something the music absolutely thrives upon.”14 And even though Phish never truly gets lost in this performance, it is very possible—likely even—that the listener does, especially upon a first hearing. The cacophonic peaks of the Bomb Factory SoaM are anxiety-producing indeed, just as the moments of fog-clearing are euphoric—and these are precisely the reasons that I continue listening to this performance even though, hundreds of hearings later, I no longer get lost.
      Indeed, this study was borne of my captivation with this performance and related personal goal of articulating my experience listening to the intense peaks and blissful resolutions of Phish jams generally. To do this, I consider the extent to which the performers are at any given moment “sharing in the groove,”15 by first isolating each of the selected groove parameters, and then for each loop considering whether each performer, on average, affirms, conflicts with, or does neither with respect to them. Musical intensity increases as the performers conflict with the groove and decreases as they affirm it. Moments of cathartic resolution occur when the band, after conflicting with the groove for a while, suddenly reaffirm it. The greater the drop in intensity, the more cathartic the resolution will be. Figure X.2, in part inspired by ludomusicologist Elizabeth Medina-Gray’s study of modular seams in video game music,16 models the entire jam in this fashion, ending immediately before the return of the song’s opening riff that brings it to an end.
<INSERT FIGURE X.2 HERE>
      Each column of Figure X.2 represents a single loop of the groove and each row a groove parameter, encoding each musician’s performance with white, black, or grey boxes, depending on whether they are affirming it, conflicting with it, or neither, respectively. The shading of the map is generally correlated with audible moments of intensity in the performance. Each letter refers to one musician: P to the keyboardist Page McConnell (henceforth “Page”), T to the guitarist Trey Anastasio (henceforth “Trey”), M to the bassist Mike Gordon (henceforth “Mike”), and F to the drummer Jon Fishman (henceforth “Fishman”). Then, a single “Intensity” value for the loop is calculated, by assigning values of 0, 1, and 2 to white, grey, and black boxes respectively and summing. Since there are 15 total boxes per loop (Fishman’s drumming does not contribute to the Pitch attribute), the Intensity may range from 0 to 30, with each decade thereof roughly corresponding to low, medium, and high degrees of intensity. Note that specific intensity values themselves do not predict a specific musical effect. Although the intensity values of Loops 10 and 72 are very close, they have very different “feels.” Loop 72’s intensity mostly stems from musical absence, causing it to feel more like an “anti-fog” compared with the intensity of presence in Loop 10.
	The intensity values are then plotted in Figure X.3, creating a line graph describing intensity throughout the entire jam. Figure X.3 reveals that there are six moments in the performance whose intensity values serve as local maxima—these are the moments of “structural fog” and are indicated with solid circles. Additionally, there are three moments, indicated with dashed circles, that represent significant local minima, where intensity values at local maxima plummet to values lower than had been seen in at least twenty loops. To my ears, these three timepoints sound like moments of clarity, where the occluding brume of the ongoing jam clears, even if momentarily, as the performers “snap back” into the jam. Figure X.2 includes annotations of each of these moments; the reader is encouraged to listen to the jam while following the map, and the moments of fog and clarity should be quite audible.
<INSERT FIGURE X.3 HERE>
      As I listen to this jam, my face cannot help but grimace, my head rock, and my limbs tense and twitch at the moments of thickest fog, particularly during Loops 24–30 and 39–46. I am not dancing, exactly, but writhing in the music’s intensity. But then I feel a concomitant sense of blissful catharsis at the beginnings of Loops 31 and 47, when the fog clears most dramatically. All told, it is no exaggeration to say that experiencing moments like these is one of the principal reasons I love this band. But my experience is by no means a universal response to a jam like this one. Why is it that where I witness ecstasy in the dynamics of tension and release in this performance, others may hear only grating chaos and unpleasant cacophony?
      
Pleasure and the Persistence of Groove (“If I Can See Through Fog That Surrounds”17)
      
      Answering this question requires positioning the performance within the broader discourse of groove theory, of which there are two principal, interlocking strands. The first originates with Keil’s theory of “participatory discrepancies,” the way that live performers typically do not enact a beat or a rhythm in an exact, mechanical manner as might a metronome or some forms of computer-produced audio, but will instead typically deviate from such exactitude, usually on the order of microseconds. This imparts to a groove a feel of “pushing ahead” when rhythmic attacks come earlier than expected, or “pulling back” when they come later.18 Most studies of such “expressive microtimings,” including Keil’s, explicitly tie them to embodied musical experience—both on the part of the performers, whose bodies literally move as they play their instruments, and on the part of listeners, who may dance or tap along as they listen.19 
      The feeling of playing or dancing to music that pushes ahead is qualitatively different from music that is performed exactly in time, which is again different from music that pulls back, and in an extended meditation on the phenomenology of groove, Tiger C. Roholt argues that that feeling is the primary way we understand a groove, and that while it is possible to measure expressive microtimings in the laboratory, “to ‘get’ a groove just is to comprehend it bodily and to feel that comprehension.”20
	Since the central reason a listener might be compelled to move along with a groove is because it is pleasurable to do so, many scholars of groove seek to understand why listeners and musicians find groove to be so pleasurable. For example, Maria A.G. Witek suggests that syncopations—moments when musicians place stress on normatively unstressed pulses—are central to the style of groove-based musics precisely because they create rhythmic gaps that the dancer enjoys using their body to fill in: syncopation “allows the body to enact silent metric accents and ‘phenomenologise’ the beat.”21 A syncopation thus become what Lawrence Zbikowski describes as a rhythmic “target, onto which bodily motion could be mapped.”22      
       Many writers have employed the psychoanalytic theories of Freud and his followers as a framework for modeling the pleasure engendered by groove: Luis-Manuel Garcia, for example, uses groove to recuperate repetition from Freud’s negative, pathological perspective on it and posit in its stead a concept of “process pleasure.”23 He argues that distinct from a pleasure that arises from mere satiation of desire, attending to repetition in groove-based music brings the pleasure of engaging in a process of mastery over the nuances of the groove’s constituent elements.24 Repetition, Garcia writes, “is not beyond the pleasure principle, but a prime bearer of process pleasure.”25
	My interest here, though, is not in the pleasure that attends getting into the SoaM groove—though that is certainly there too, and you bet I’m dancing up a storm during its first few, “normal” loops. Rather, I am interested in the pleasure attending those moments when the performance most radically departs from the basic groove—that is: the pleasure of listening to structural fog. One way this pleasure could manifest is as an extreme form of Garcia’s process pleasure, where a listener is so well-attuned to—has attained such mastery over—the groove that, like the band members, she persists in perceiving it: even when the jam is at its most remote, she can see through the “fog that surrounds.”26
	Considering a second psychoanalytic perspective, Witek identifies the pleasure of a dancer’s loss of self in a manner resembling a state of religious ecstasy through a concept theorized by the psychoanalyst Jacques Lacan. To dance to groove-based music is to “phenomenologise” the beat, Witek writes; to “feel the jouissance of physically losing ourselves and thus actively becoming the music.”27 Jouissance is Lacan’s term for a kind of excess pleasure, a complicated mixture of enjoyment and pain. In a central exegesis of Lacan’s theory, Dylan Evans describes it thusly: 
The pleasure principle functions as a limit to enjoyment; it is a law which commands the subject to “enjoy as little as possible.” At the same time, the subject constantly attempts to transgress the prohibitions imposed on his enjoyment, to go “beyond the pleasure principle.” However, the result of transgressing the pleasure principle is not more pleasure, but pain, since there is only a certain amount of pleasure that the subject can bear. Beyond this limit, pleasure becomes pain, and this “painful pleasure” is what Lacan calls jouissance; “jouissance is suffering.”28

Witek frames her account of the jouissance engendered through dance only as an immersive, material pleasure, one “that does not require the successful decoding of musical meaning or satisfaction of drive.”29 For example, in identifying the body’s role in filling in the rhythmic gaps of syncopation, she argues that moderate amounts of syncopation are most effective in producing pleasure.30 But what is the experience of attending to music with too many syncopations?
      One way to answer this question is to nuance Witek’s account by considering jouissance not just as an experience of pleasure, but with a critical eye toward it being that complex mélange of suffering and enjoyment. Let us reconfigure Evans and posit that Witek’s account of moderate syncopation establishes a “groove principle.” According to this framework, the groove principle sets a temporal or quantitative limit to a groove’s participatory discrepancies, beyond which they no longer produce pleasure. But that is precisely what happens in this SoaM: the participatory discrepancies expand beyond the boundaries of mere expressive microtimings, far transgressing the rhythmic and structural norms of groove. The intense peaks of this SoaM, then, go “beyond the groove principle”—and as the dancing bodies seek to fill in the countless gaps opened up as the musicians abandon the groove, the resulting brew of pleasurable pain is nothing less than jouissance. And so when I listen, I writhe.	 

Part II: The Mechanics of the Groove (“Let’s Get Down to the Nitty-Gritty”31)

Figure X.2 rests on a handful of principles and methodologies from the discipline of music theory that may not be of interest to every reader. The following discussion provides definitions and primers for each of the four parameters considered in Figure X.2, along with a description of how each may affirm or conflict with the groove. Then follows in-depth analysis of a few loops of the groove, demonstrating how Intensity is calculated in practice. Readers disinclined to wade through the technical analytical detail should feel free to skip ahead to the Conclusion.

Elements of the Groove (“What it Contains, How Long it Goes”32)

Pitch: Consonance and Dissonance

      The first parameter to consider is pitch, and whether the notes the performers play are consonant or dissonant with the chord progression of the ongoing groove. Pitch refers to the specific frequency at which a sounding body causes air to vibrate—faster vibrations sound higher and slower vibrations sound lower—and although there are an infinite number of frequencies at which air may vibrate, Western musicians have historically identified a discrete set of them, which we designate using letter names. 
      Most of the time in music, more than one pitch sounds at a time: consonance and dissonance describe the aural effect of two pitches sounding together. For example, the intervals of the perfect fifth and major third that appear in Figure X.Aa and X.Ab are consonant, and thus sound pleasing to the ear, while the intervals of the major second and augmented fourth that appear in Figure X.Ac and X.Ad are dissonant and may sound unsettling or grating to the ear. (See figure X.A in the free PDF available under the "Features” tab on the book’s landing page.) However, consonance and dissonance are not a strictly binary opposition: playing each of these intervals at the piano from left to right reveals that they lie on a spectrum from most consonant to most dissonant. Therefore, this study follows Medina-Grey in assigning pitches into one of three categories: consonance, soft dissonance, and hard dissonance.33
      For each chord in the groove that appears in Figure X.1, Table X.1 tabulates which pitches are consonances, soft dissonances, or hard dissonances. Pitches that constitute the basic triad for each chord are considered consonances. For C#m9 and A9, chordal sevenths and ninths, plus any notes of C# natural minor not in the triad are considered soft dissonances. Anything else is a hard dissonance. For B major, notes not in the triad but diatonic in C# minor are soft dissonances and anything else is a hard dissonance. For B# major, since this triad is part of the half-step ascending motion constituting the hook, its table of consonances and dissonances is the same as that for B major, with all notes transposed up by half step.
<INSERT TABLE X.1 HERE>
      In practice, the detail in the taxonomy of Table X.1 gives way to a more holistic, perceptual account of consonance and dissonance in each loop of the groove. After all, identifying the pitch content of an entire four-measure unit only as affirming, conflicting with, or neither affirming nor conflicting with the harmonies of the groove does not provide a particularly granular account of difference. Since each instrument might play dozens of notes in a single loop, the precise consonance measurement of any individual pitch contributes a tiny fraction to the overall consonance of the entire passage. Rather than engaging in such a hypergranular study, then, I first asked myself whether each performer emphasized mostly consonances, mostly hard dissonances, or mostly soft dissonances. Such loops are easily categorized as affirming, conflicting, or neither, respectively. Then, if during a loop, a performer emphasizes consonances and hard dissonances roughly equally, or if the performer went silent for a significant portion of the loop, I identified it as neither affirming nor conflicting. Finally, in cases where there was roughly equivalent emphasis of consonance or soft dissonance on the one hand or soft dissonance and hard dissonance on the other, I relied on my best judgment. Note that since Fishman does not play a pitched instrument in this jam, the analysis does not indicate any kind of contribution to the global effect of consonance on his behalf.

Beat
      
      Beat and hypermeter (discussed in the next section) are related concepts describing the temporal organization of music. Whereas a musical pulse is the shortest increment of time that can be perceived as periodic—in this case, Fishman’s steady cymbal strikes establish a plausible eighth-note pulse for the groove—theories of rhythm and meter generally model time in music as being organized by hierarchical levels of rhythmic strata. Pulses constitute an undifferentiated division of time into equal units, as might a digital clock that “ticks” each second. However, music tends to group pulses into larger repeating patterns of stress/unstress: in the “tick-tock” of a grandfather clock, each sound reflects the pulse, but the “tock” feels stronger than the “tick,” and the combined “tick-tock” seems to group itself into a larger repeating unit. This is the basic principle of beats, which arise when a series of pulses are subject to a periodic accentual pattern, and the process can be repeated again to create the next higher structural level: the measure. Table X.A, in the free PDF available under the "Features” tab on the book’s landing page, adapts a well-known visualization of the metrical hierarchy, showing how the interactions of stress patterns in the ongoing pulse stream create the 4/4 meter Phish uses in SoaM.
      The first beat of each measure, the “downbeat,” carries the strongest accent; the third beat is somewhat accented; and the second and fourth are unstressed. The lowest row demonstrates how musicians typically count measures: note that only the beats are numbered, pulses between beats are all labeled “and” (indicated by the “+” sign), and the measure number is substituted for the “1” of the downbeat. Table X.A, which is idealized, captures the metrical organization of the first three measures of the SoaM groove, but there is a small complication in the fourth measure: its second beat is slightly longer than the others (the dot in Figure X.1 next to the quarter note increases its duration by 50%). The reader is encouraged to count along with Figure X.1 to get a feel for the relative weights of the four beats, adding one extra syllable, “a,” after the second “and” of measure 4. We will consider the altered meter of the fourth measure again when considering the hook.
      For this model, a musician affirms the beat when their performance is reasonably aligned with the accentual pattern of Table X.A, including momentary syncopations. For example, in Figure X.1, syncopations occur on the relatively strong third beats of mm. 1, 2, and 3 because none of the instruments save for Fishman’s hi-hat articulate at those moments of metric accent. Instead, the accents in the voice and kick drum occur one eighth note later, and the accent in the bass occurs one eighth note earlier. As discussed in Part I, though, momentary syncopation is a characteristic feature of groove, and they therefore contribute to affirming it, rather than conflicting with it. Moreover, a listener is likely to perceive what Matthew W. Butterfield has called a “virtual articulation” at moments of metrical accent.34 And as Witek puts it, a syncopation is not a silence, but rather something that exposes “the metric accents of the rhythm, which are as real and as perceived as the sounds of the phenomenal accents themselves.”35
      Once again adapting Medina-Grey’s methodology,36 the model identifies as neither affirming nor conflicting extended syncopated gestures, called “displacement dissonances,” where a player’s ongoing performance implies that the beat pattern has shifted, say, one eighth note ahead of where it is expected. Similarly, performances that suggest that a measure contains, say, 3 equally spaced beats instead of 4, an effect called a “grouping dissonance,” are categorized the same way,37 and the third kind of performance in this category would be long, sustained tones, as they suggest very little, if any, accentual patterning. 
      Lastly, performances conflict with the meter if they (a) simultaneously feature a grouping and a displacement dissonance; (b) feature a grouping dissonance that does not fit in a single measure;38 or (c) feature musical gestures with irregular patterns of stress that cannot be easily perceived as periodic.

Hypermeter

      Hypermeter is a still-higher temporal process that treats measures as though they were beats, as shown in the penultimate row of Table X.A. Hypermeter is an easily perceptible, and critically important, phenomenon: one that, as Jacob Cohen argues elsewhere in this volume, is a central feature in the architecture of Phish’s improvisations. 39 At the same time, it can seem rather abstract at first, so it will be worthwhile to make a quick detour on the subject.
      Generally, music feels regular and predictable when measures group into twos or fours, as does the SoaM groove, and when this grouping persists throughout a song. By contrast, measures in odd or irregular groupings have an off-balance feel. “Piper” is an example of a song with odd measure groupings, and these produce its off-kilter effect; Table X.2 organizes the lyrics by beat and then by measure, and the resulting three measure grouping persists throughout the entire song. The reader is encouraged to count along with the beats to get a feel for the song’s three-measure groupings, substituting the measure number for the downbeat of each measure: “1-2-3-4; 2-2-3-4; 3-2-3-4”.
<INSERT TABLE X.2 HERE>
      Conversely, “Cavern” groups an even four measures into its hypermeasures and feels more regular as a result. Table X.3 organizes the lyrics of “Cavern” into its groupings and also shows how an abbreviated hypermeasure, late in the song, serves to articulate a significant structural event. The first two rows represent the first verse of the song, which falls into the regular 4-measure groupings that pervade nearly the entire song—even at the two moments with slight pause: “I gave some last advice” and “Taking turns at grabbing her. The reader is encouraged to count along with “Cavern” using the same strategy as with “Piper,” adding a fourth measure per hypermeasure, counted “4-2-3-4”, to get a feel for how this grouping organizes the song, and how this even hypermeter creates a different large-scale rhythmic effect than the odd hypermeter in “Piper.”
<INSERT TABLE X.3 HERE>
      A crucial metrical event occurs at the start of the song’s coda: one hypermeasure ends too early, as shown at the bottom of Table X.3. The final verse begins normally, but the second half of the second hypermeasure is missing, having been cut short by the arrival of the coda, which articulates a significant change in the rhythm and prosody of the lyrics, which is visually apparent in the last two rows of Table X.3, and begins a new pattern of four-measure groupings.40 The metrical effect is that of an interruption, which the reader can confirm by counting: first, try continuing to count “3” and “4” the measures with “Give the director” and “A Serpent deflector” and onwards; then try restarting the count at “1” and “2” at the same place. Crucially, note how the moment of interruption feels less like the old hypermeasure is too short and more like the new hypermeasure arrived too soon. In other words, even though it is literally the “In summing up” hypermeter that departs from the four-measure pattern, the effect of that alteration is not perceived until the “Give the director” hypermeter, marking the new, rather than the old, hypermeasure for consciousness.41 Therefore, in the present model, hypermetrical alterations are registered in the loop after they occur.
      Returning to SoaM: each loop of the SoaM groove consists of a four-measure hypermeasure. When the musicians strongly accentuate the downbeat of a loop’s first measure—which they especially do if they confirm the hook as described below—then they confirm the hypermeasure. As with beat, even if the performer adds a syncopation to this downbeat, the “virtual articulation” will still be heard in the correct place, and so momentary syncopations do not conflict with the hypermeasure. By contrast, when a musician’s gesture implies a rhetorical downbeat other than on the first beat of the hypermeasure, the gesture conflicts. But also as with beat, if a performer in the midst of a displacement dissonance shifts his apparent downbeat backward or forward; or if the musician drops out at the beginning of the loop, his performance neither affirms nor conflicts with the groove.

The Hook

      The hook is probably the easiest aspect of the groove to hear—it consists of the B and B# of the last measure leading into the C# of the first measure. This is an audible cue that the groove is looping back around and getting ready to start over again. Musicians refer to such a musical event, when a temporal component of one grouping leads in to a new one, as an “anacrusis.” For example, refer again to Table X.2 and note that the word “Awoke,” which belongs both melodically and lyrically to the second hypermeasure, actually begins very late in the first hypermeasure, just as the “The”, which belongs to the third hypermeasure, actually appears at the end of the second one. Similarly, in Table X.3, both verses of “Cavern” begin with an anacrusis: in the first, “Your” really belongs with “time is near,” even though it literally appears in the fourth beat of the measure preceding the new hypermeter. This is true not only lyrically, but musically as well; even if this were a purely instrumental moment, the note on “Your” would sound like it belongs to the music that follows. 
      As such, this model considers the hook to be part of the loop that it leads into, rather than the one it literally ends. In Figure X.1, the hook is articulated by all, with Fishman breaking out of his ongoing drum pattern to realize it with quarter-note strikes on the cymbal. The hook—which is actually prefigured by Mike’s bass pattern leading into each measure with the same B-B#-C# anacrusis (labeled “Pre-hook” on Figure X.1)—becomes something of a metrical signature, the “grain of the groove” for the song, and it is the principal feature identifying the jam in the track “Demand” from the studio album Hoist as being excerpted from a performance of SoaM.42
	While the hook is easy to hear, it overlaps functionally with all of the other features: in the case of pitch, its default appearance is built around a specific pattern of notes; in the case of hypermeter, the hook provides the most significant aural cue that a new loop is beginning and thus that a hypermeasure is ending; and in the case of beat, each strike of the hook is aligned with three beats in the ongoing meter. Because of the hook’s overdetermined nature, this study registers deviations from the B-B#-C# pattern in the pitch parameter and treats only the three-quarter-note rhythmic anacrusis as the determining feature of the hook. Thus, a player affirms the hook by performing the three quarter notes at the appropriate time, conflicts with the hook by performing a rhythm that conflicts with the structure of the three beats as described in the section on beat above, and neither affirms nor conflicts with the hook if (a) the performance aligns with both the beat and the hypermeter without articulating the three quarter notes, or (b) the player either performs a sustained tone or drops out in the moments surrounding the hook.

Determining a Loop’s Intensity Value (“Rise up and come together”43)

      Having laid out the parameters of the groove, this section now considers a few specific loops of the groove as representative samples to clarify how the intensity levels were determined. 
First, refer to Figure X.2 and consider the 10th loop of the jam, beginning at 5:11 on the recording, where Figure X.4 provides isolated transcriptions from this loop. Each of the white boxes in Figure X.2 indicates that there are no discrepancies in that aspect by that performer (remember that, as described above, the hook and hypermeter aspects refer to the loop immediately preceding, i.e. the end of Loop 9). The diagram indicates that Page’s notes conflict with the chord structure, which can be seen in Figure X.4a, a transcription of Page’s performance. 
<INSERT FIGURE X.4 HERE>

Comparing these notes to Table X.1 reveals that while the first measure is entirely consonant, the arrival of the F in the second measure marks a hard dissonance. The F# and G in the first half of the third measure juxtapose a soft dissonance with a hard one, and later in the measure, the E and F# juxtapose a soft dissonance with a consonance. The F (spelled as E#) and G pair on the downbeat of the next bar are both hard dissonances that alternate with F#, a soft dissonance. And finally, the E-F motion at the end of the last bar reflects a soft dissonance moving to a soft dissonance. On the whole, then, there is a considerable amount of hard and soft dissonance, with only a small amount of consonance, and the hard dissonance seems to outweigh the soft dissonance, so I indicate that the pitch content conflicts with the groove and shade the appropriate cell black. 
      Compare this with Mike’s performance, transcribed in Figure X.4b: here, the bass plays completely consonant tones in the first and third measure, but hard dissonances in measure 2 and the first half of measure 4, returning to consonances for the last two quarter notes. This performance seems to split the difference between consonance and hard dissonance, and so I indicate that the pitch content neither affirms nor conflicts with the groove and shade the appropriate cell grey.
      Finally, Trey’s performance mostly hovers around C#, a consonance, and G#, which alternates between being a consonance and a soft-dissonance, so his performance mostly affirms the pitch content of the groove, and I shade his pitch box white. However, his rhythmic/metric positioning has been running in conflict with the beat and hypermetrical pattern since the previous loop: he has been alternating between the two fragments transcribed in Figure X.4c, neither of which themselves adhere well to the ongoing meter of the groove, but additionally, the time interval between each fragment keeps changing, which completely obliterates both a clear sense of a regular meter and, consequently, a clear sense of hypermeter and ultimately also of the hook. Indeed, his first arrival on the high C#, which sounds rhetorically like it should be a downbeat, comes about a beat after the rest of the instruments have articulated both the hook and its establishment of the end of one hypermeasure and the start of the next. Thus, I shaded the cells for Trey’s performance of beat, hook, and hypermeter black.
      The takeaway of Loop 10 is that, while there is some degree of conflict with the basic groove, there are enough features confirming it that it is still easy to follow while listening, and the diagram nicely captures the loop’s aural effect, as it is easy to visually perceive that the loop has only moderate amounts  of shading, i.e., musical conflicts with the ongoing groove. The intensity value of 10 indicates that the loop straddles low and medium levels of intensity, which feels appropriate.
	By contrast, examining Loop 44, from several minutes later in the jam, makes it immediately clear that there is a high degree of musical conflict—in fact, it is only Fishman’s insistent articulation of the hook, and its correlated establishment of the hypermeter, that serves as a reliable point of contact between this passage and the basic groove, and none of the rest of his performance aligns with the beat of the basic groove.44 The aural effect at this point is cacophony. Trey’s guitar generates arrhythmic growls that barely sound like distinct musical pitches. By this point, for many loops, Mike has been playing an irregularly repeating (hence, beat-, hypermeter-, and hook-conflicting) pattern D#-E-B, which emphasizes two soft dissonances.45 At the same time, though, it is a gesture derived from the hook and pre-hook; for this reason, it seemed sensible to assign an intensity value of 1 for Mike’s contribution to the hook parameter at this point. Page similarly hammers in an arrhythmic fashion a sonority with G, C, and C# that alternates with B—significant hard dissonance with only a touch of soft dissonance or consonance, and the G-C# interval of the augmented fourth is by its nature a hard dissonant interval (as shown in Figure X.Ad). The loop’s intensity value of 23 is the highest of the entire jam, and appropriately captures the disorienting cacophony of this section.
	Lastly, Loop 72, which precedes the first 0-intensity loop since Loop 2, features a slight, anomalous increase in intensity from those that preceded it: a relatively low 9 that follows Loops 63 through 72, where the average intensity is 5.1. This intensity bump is mostly a result of the fact that instruments have been dropping out of the texture, meaning that they are neither affirming nor conflicting with the groove: Mike’s low C#, while groove-affirming, is barely audible, and Trey has, since Loop 59, barely played anything but F-F#-G at the hook, all of which create hard dissonances with the hook’s chords. The other significant feature of this loop is perhaps an error in performance: both Page and Fishman rush the rhythm a bit, which creates a conflict with the groove’s meter. 
	The description of the methods used to determine the Intensity values for Loops 10, 44, and 72 stand as representative for the methods used to determine them for the remaining loops of the jam. In a broader context, the method can be extended to encompass the study of any performance of any groove through the judicious selection and quantization of its constitutive musical parameters.

Conclusion (“In Summing Up”46)

      Roholt hints that a central impetus for his phenomenological study of groove was a desire to understand why his friends did not “get” the grooves of some of his favorite music,47 an experience likely familiar to the typical Phish fan. Many of us, upon first exposure, were immediately captivated by this band and were excited to soak in all their musical possibilities, from the soaring peaks of “bliss jams” to the dark, brooding, atonal depths of “evil Phish.” But what of our uninitiated friends and family? What is their experience of the heavy fog of Loops 39–46? Well, if they are not primed to enjoy Phish in the first place, and if jouissance is a combination of pleasure and pain, then some simple algebra tells us exactly what they experience: jouissance minus pleasure equals pain. Roholt offers a practical suggestion for trying to “get” a new and unfamiliar groove, which is to experiment with moving your body to find the appropriate motions that click.48 But if the peak of the SoaM jam overwhelms the listener with gaps to fill in—and if the very point for the Phish fan is to be thusly overwhelmed, as it surely is for me—Roholt’s strategy may not be effective here.
      An alternative is to observe that the Bomb Factory SoaM’s structural fog stands as a synecdoche for perhaps the central appeal of attending Phish concerts night after night and year after year: the hope and anticipation that the band will bring to their performance something truly surprising and unique. Just as an accultured fan can derive pleasure from seeing through the structural fog that surrounds SoaM and continuing to perceive its underlying groove, she can derive tremendous pleasure from a surprise bustout. Without understanding the norms of Phish performance, newcomers simply do not have the context for appreciating how and when the band departs from them.
      Thus, introducing newcomers to the band may mean familiarizing them with certain aspects of their performance style that may not be immediately obvious. The 2019 Phish Studies Conference that prompted this book began with a listening session in which Jacob Cohen, Julie Viscardi-Smalley and I presented three performances of “Chalk Dust Torture”—May 17, 1992,  July 10, 1999, and July 13, 2014— to demonstrate diachronic changes in Phish’s improvisational style.49 Taking a similar tack, helping newcomers understand what is special about the Bomb Factory SoaM might mean sharing with them multiple, stylistically-varying performances of the song. 
      We could even develop and present our own Intensity curves for different performances of “Split Open and Melt,” or suggest that our newcomer friends and family do the same. These do not need to be based on a detailed formalism like that outlined in this chapter’s Part II. Rather, they can simply represent our subjective impressions of the performance over time, like the approach that Ingrid Monson takes in sketching an intensity diagram of “Bass-ment Blues” by the Jaki Byard Quartet.50 Monson’s diagram resembles this chapter’s Figure X.3 in broad strokes, even if it rests on a different methodology, and just as my approach offers the advantage of restricting its subjective purview to local moments within the performance while allowing them to inform the global model through a rule-based normalizing procedure, hers is a more democratized approach that does not require any specialized expertise in musical analysis. 
      In sum, the model developed in this study formally captures a major aspect of Phish’s performance practice that has long drawn me to their music. Breaking down the SoaM groove into four constituent parameters allows the listener-analyst to determine, in an ongoing way, the degree to which each of the performers shares in the groove. When the musicians mostly affirm the groove and generate low levels of intensity, the experience of listening can be readily modeled by the existing discourse of groove. But when the players go beyond the groove principle and generate high levels of intensity, a very different kind of listening experience emerges.
      Perhaps surprisingly, the latter is an experience wholly native to some theories of music that accounts of groove expressly resist. Keil and Feld explicitly sought to supplant the theories of musical syntax espoused by the music theorist Leonard Meyer with a theory that celebrates the processual nature of groove’s repetitions.51 Meyer dismisses repetitive music as “primitive,” believing that it only offers mere immediate gratification to its listeners. By contrast, he praises “sophisticated art music” for its procedures of intensification, delayed gratification, and subsequent release,52 and these are precisely the kind of procedures captured by this model. 
      Witek, too, positions her study of groove explicitly contra Meyer, whose syntactical model of music she compares with Freud’s views on orgasm: “Groove is not teleological, as there is no structural-developmental goal, such as a climax.” She continues, “Rather, because the rhythmically complex patterns are constantly repeating, groove is cyclical and thus more appropriately compared with sexual foreplay—a type of pleasure that Freud found hard to explain.”53 But, though it is clearly groove-based, and thus subject to all the process pleasures occurring thereto, the Bomb Factory SoaM also features the jouissance of intense climaxes and gratifying resolutions. Foreplay followed by orgasm? Tell me again why everyone doesn’t love this band?
      

Works Cited (“I Whisper Your Name”54)

Alén, Olavo. “Rhythm as Duration of Sounds in Tumba Fracesa.” Ethnomusicology 39, No. 1 (Winter, 1995): 55–71. 
Butler, Mark. Unlocking the Groove: Rhythm, Meter, and Musical Design in Electronic Dance Music. Bloomington, IN: Indiana University Press, 2006.
Butterfield, Matthew W. “The Power of Anacrusis: Engendered Feeling in Groove-Based Musics.” Music Theory Online 12, No. 4 (December, 2006): https://mtosmt.org/issues/mto.06.12.4/mto.06.12.4.butterfield.html.
Cooper, Grosvenor W., and Leonard B. Meyer. The Rhythmic Structure of Music. University of Chicago Press, 1960.
Evans, Dylan. An Introductory Dictionary of Lacanian Psychoanalysis. New York: Routledge, 1996.
Garcia, Luis-Manuel. “On and On: Repetition as Process and Pleasure in Electronic Dance Music.” Music Theory Online 11, No. 4 (October, 2005): https://www.mtosmt.org/issues/mto.05.11.4/mto.05.11.4.garcia.html.
Iyer, Vijay. “Embodied Mind, Situated Cognition, and Expressive Microtiming in African-American Music.” Music Perception: An Interdisciplinary Journal 19, No. 3 (Spring, 2002): 387–414.
Keil, Charles, and Steven Feld. Music Grooves: Essays and Dialogues. The University of Chicago Press, 1994.
Krebs, Harald. Fantasy Pieces: Metrical Dissonance in the Music of Robert Schumann. New York: Oxford University Press, 1999.
Lerdahl, Fred, and Ray Jackendoff. A Generative Theory of Tonal Music. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1983.
Madison, Guy. “Experiencing Groove Induced by Music: Consistency and Phenomenology.” Music Perception 24, No. 2 (December, 2006): 201–208.
Medina-Grey, Elizabeth. “Analyzing Modular Smoothness in Video Game Music.” Music Theory Online 25, No. 3 (September, 2019): https://www.mtosmt.org/issues/mto.19.25.3/mto.19.25.3.medina.gray.html
Meyer, Leonard. Emotion and Meaning in Music. University of Chicago Press, 1956.
Meyer, Leonard. Music, the Arts, and Ideas. University of Chicago Press, 1967.
Monson, Ingrid. Saying Something: Jazz Improvisation and Interaction. The University of Chicago Press, 1996.
Oliver, Rowan. “Groove as Familiarity with Time.” In Music and Familiarity: Listening, Musicology, and Performance, edited by Elaine King and Helen M. Prior, 239–252. New York: Routledge, 2013.
Osborne, Brad. “Subverting the Verse—Chorus Paradigm: Terminally Climactic Forms in Recent Rock Music.” Music Theory Spectrum 35, No. 1 (Spring 2013): 23–47.
Phish. “AC/DC Bag.” By Trey Anastasio. Track 4 on The White Tape. Phish Dry Goods, 1998. Lyrics retrieved from https://phish.net
Phish. “Backwards Down the Number Line.” By Trey Anastasio and Tom Marshall. Track 1 on Joy. JEMP Records, 2009. Lyrics retrieved from https://phish.net
Phish. “Demand.” By Trey Anastasio & Tom Marshall. Track 11 on Hoist. Elektra Records, 1994. Lyrics retrieved from https://phish.net
Phish. “Down with Disease.” By Trey Anastasio &amp; Tom Marshall. Track 2 on Hoist. Elektra Records, 1994. Lyrics retrieved from https://phish.net
Phish. “Limb by Limb.” By Trey Anastasio, Tom Marshall, & Scott Herman. Track 7 on The Story of the Ghost. Elektra Records, 1998. Lyrics retrieved from https://phish.net
Phish. “Maze.” By Trey Anastasio & Tom Marshall. Track 4 on Rift. Elektra Records, 1993. Lyrics retrieved from https://phish.net
Phish. “Mike’s Song.” By Mike Gordon. Track 5 on Slip Stitch and Pass. Elektra Records, 1997. Lyrics retrieved from https://phish.net
Phish. “Miss You.” By Trey Anastasio. Track 10 on Big Boat. JEMP Records, 2016. Lyrics retrieved from https://phish.net
Phish. “Rise/Come Together.” By Trey Anastasio, Kenny Greenberg, & Gary Nicholson. Live debut: Peterson Events Center, Pittsburgh, PA, July 19, 2017. Lyrics retrieved from https://phish.net
Phish. “Set Your Soul Free.” By Trey Anastasio. Live debut: Gorge Amphitheatre, George, GA, July 20, 2018. Lyrics retrieved from https://phish.net
Phish. “Split Open and Melt.” By Trey Anastasio. Track 4 on Lawn Boy. Absolute A Go Go, 1990. Lyrics retrieved from https://phish.net
Phish. “Split Open and Melt.” By Trey Anastasio. Track 7 on Disc 1 of Live Phish, Vol. 18. Elektra, 2003.
Phish. “Taste.” By Trey Anastasio, Jon Fishman, Mike Gordon, Tom Marshall, & Page McConnell. Track 4 on Billy Breathes. Elektra Records, 1996. Lyrics retrieved from https://phish.net
Progler, J.A. “Searching for Swing: Participatory Discrepancies in the Jazz Rhythm Section.” Ethnomusicology 39, No. 1 (Winter, 1995): 21–54.
Reale, Steven. “The Calculus of Finite (Metric) Dissonance.” Music Theory Spectrum 41, No. 1 (Spring 2019): 146–171.
Roholt, Tiger C. Groove: A Phenomenology of Rhythmic Nuance. New York: Bloomsbury, 2014.
Spicer, Mark. “(Ac)cumulative Form in Pop-Rock Music.” Twentieth-century music 1, no. 1 (March 2004): 29–64. 
Witek, Maria A. G. “Filling In: Syncopation, Pleasure, and Distributed Embodiment in Groove.” Music Analysis 36, No. 1 (2017): 138–160.
Zbikowski, Lawrence M. “Modelling the Groove: Conceptual Structure and Popular Music.” Journal of the Royal Music Association 129, no. 2 (2004): 272–297. 
1 Phish, “Maze,” by Trey Anastasio & Tom Marshall. Track 4 on Rift (Elektra Records, 1993). Lyrics retrieved from https://phish.net.
2 The author thanks his sister, Jennifer Reale English—who carries the distinction of having introduced him to the band so many decades ago—for reviewing and making revision suggestions on an earlier draft of this chapter. Her hands and feet are mangos.
3 Phish. “Split Open and Melt.” By Trey Anastasio. Track 7 on Disc 1 of Live Phish, Vol. 18 (Elektra Records, 2003).
4 Phish, “Down with Disease,” by Trey Anastasio & Tom Marshall. Track 2 on Hoist (Elektra Records, 1994). Lyrics retrieved from https://phish.net
5 Phish, “Set Your Soul Free,” by Trey Anastasio. Live debut: Gorge Amphitheatre, George, GA,
July 20, 2018. Lyrics retrieved from https://phish.net
6 Charles Keil and Steven Feld, Music Grooves: Essays and Dialogues (The University of Chicago Press, 1994), 109. Emphasis mine.
7 Mark Spicer, “(Ac)cumulative Form in Pop-Rock Music,” twentieth-century music 1/1 (March 2004): 30n6. See also Lawrence M. Zbikowski, “Modelling the Groove: Conceptual Structure and Popular Music,” Journal of the Royal Music Association 129/2 (2004): 275.
8 Occasionally, writers theorize about “solo grooves,” but they inevitably do so in a manner against the grain, which presumes that groove is normatively understood as being constituted collectively. See Rowan Oliver, “Groove as Familiarity with Time,” in Music and Familiarity: Listening, Musicology, and Performance, ed. Elaine King and Helen M. Prior (New York: Routledge, 2013), 240–241; and J.A. Progler, “Searching for Swing: Participatory Discrepancies in the Jazz Rhythm Section,” Ethnomusicology 39/1 (Winter 1995): 52n13.
9 Keil and Feld, Music Grooves, 111.
10 Ingrid Monson, Saying Something: Jazz Improvisation and Interaction (University of Chicago Press, 1996), 189.
11 Ibid., 69.
12 Phish, “Split Open and Melt,” by Trey Anastasio. Track 4 on Lawn Boy (Absolute A Go Go,
1990). Lyrics retrieved from https://phish.net
13 Phish, “Limb by Limb,” by Trey Anastasio, Tom Marshall, & Scott Herman. Track 7 on The
Story of the Ghost (Elektra Records, 1998). Lyrics retrieved from https://phish.net
14 Monson, Saying Something, 27.
15 Phish, “Mike’s Song,” by Mike Gordon. Track 5 on Slip Stitch and Pass (Elektra Records, 1997). Lyrics retrieved from https://phish.net
16 Elizabeth Medina-Grey, “Analyzing Modular Smoothness in Video Game Music,” Music Theory Online 25/3 (September 2019).
17 Phish, “Taste,” by Trey Anastasio, Jon Fishman, Mike Gordon, Tom Marshall, & Page
McConnell. Track 4 on Billy Breathes (Elektra Records, 1996). Lyrics retrieved from
https://phish.net
18 Keil and Feld, Music Grooves, 98.
19 A few representative examples: Vijay Iyer, “Embodied Mind, Situated Cognition, and Expressive Microtiming in African-American Music,” Music Perception: An Interdisciplinary Journal 19/3 (Spring 2002): 387–414. Zbikowski, “Modelling the Groove,” 280, 294. Guy Madison, “Experiencing Groove Induced by Music: Consistency and Phenomenology,” Music Perception 24/2 (December 2006): 201. Matthew W. Butterfield, “The Power of Anacrusis: Engendered Feeling in Groove-Based Musics,” Music Theory Online 12/4 (December 2006): [5].
20 Tiger C. Roholt, Groove: A Phenomenology of Rhythmic Nuance (New York: Bloomsbury, 2014), 108–110. Emphasis original. Studies that center on measuring expressive microtimings include Vijay Iyer, op. cit.; Progler, “Searching for Swing,” 21–54; and Olavo Alén, “Rhythm as Duration of Sounds in Tumba Fracesa,” Ethnomusicology 39/1 (Winter 1995): 55–71.
21 Maria A. G. Witek, “Filling In: Syncopation, Pleasure, and Distributed Embodiment in Groove,” Music Analysis 36/1 (2017):  146.
22 Zbikowski, “Modelling the Groove,” 286. Emphasis mine.
23 Luis-Manuel Garcia, “On and On: Repetition as Process and Pleasure in Electronic Dance Music,” Music Theory Online 11/4 (October 2005): [3.3–3.4].
24 Ibid., [5.2–6.2]. 
25 Ibid., [3.6].
26 Phish, “Taste”, 1996.
27Witek, “Filling In”, 150.
28 Dylan Evans, An Introductory Dictionary of Lacanian Psychoanalysis, (New York: Routledge, 1996), 93.
29 Witek, “Filling In”, 150.
30 Ibid., 152.
31 Phish, “AC/DC Bag,” by Trey Anastasio. Track 4 on The White Tape (Phish Dry Goods, 1998). Lyrics retrieved from https://phish.net
32 Phish, “Backwards Down the Number Line,” by Trey Anastasio and Tom Marshall. Track 1 on Joy (JEMP Records 2009). Lyrics retrieved from https://phish.net
33 Medina-Grey, “Modular Smoothness”, [26–29].
34 Butterfield, “The Power of Anacrusis”, [27].
35 Witek, “Filling In,” 145.
36 Medina-Grey, “Modular Smoothness,” [19–22]. 
37 On grouping and displacement dissonances, see Krebs, Fantasy Pieces, 22–62.
38 Elsewhere, I have analyzed Phish’s “First Tube” from the standpoint of such grouping dissonance, examining the periodic increase and decrease in tension that attends the opening riff, in which Trey plays a melody in measures that are 12.5% longer than those established by the drum and bass groove. Steven Reale, “The Calculus of Finite (Metric) Dissonance,” Music Theory Spectrum 41/1 (Spring 2019): 146–71.
39 Mark Butler engages in a lengthy study of the function of hypermeasure and other “multimeasure patternings” in electronic dance music. See Unlocking the Groove: Rhythm, Meter, and Musical Design in Electronic Dance Music (Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 2006), 179 –201. Also see Spicer, “(Ac)cumulative Form,” 36.
40 “Cavern” is an example of what music theorist Brad Osborne calls a “terminally climactic form,” where a song’s climax appears in a coda that introduces material thematically unrelated to the rest of the song. Other examples include Crosby, Stills, and Nash’s “Suite: Judy Blue Eyes” and The Beatles’s “Hey Jude.” Brad Osborne, “Subverting the Verse—Chorus Paradigm: Terminally Climactic Forms in Recent Rock Music,” Music Theory Spectrum 35/1 (Spring 2013): 23–24. 
41 On rhythmic events being “marked for consciousness,” see Grosvenor W. Cooper and Leonard B. Meyer, The Rhythmic Structure of Music, (The University of Chicago Press, 1960), 8.
42 Phish, “Demand,” by Trey Anastasio & Tom Marshall. Track 11 on Hoist (Elektra Records, 1994). Lyrics retrieved from https://phish.net
43 Phish, “Rise/Come Together,” by Trey Anastasio, Kenny Greenberg, & Gary Nicholson. Live debut: Peterson Events Center, Pittsburgh, PA, July 19, 2017. Lyrics retrieved from https://phish.net
44 Jazz musicians refer to a drumming practice, where a specific cymbal or drum serves to provide rhythmic stability, where the other parts of the drumkit may be discrepant, as “giving the limb,” i.e., one of the drummers four limbs is tasked with keeping strict time. See Monson, Saying Something, 57.
45 The pattern also implies a different key, E major, and although E major and C# minor are very closely related (they share the same key signature), the fact that Mike is implying a different key further conflicts with the basic groove.
46 Phish, “Cavern”, 1992.
47 Roholt, Groove, 3, 43–44, 141n1.
48 Ibid., 120–22. 
49 See Jake’s contribution to this volume for a detailed discussion of the July 10, 1999 performance of “Chalk Dust Torture.”
50 Monson, Saying Something, 139.
51 Keil and Feld, Music Grooves, 54.
52 Leonard Meyer, Emotion and Meaning in Music (University of Chicago Press, 1956), 135 –138, 151–156. Leonard Meyer, Music, the Arts, and Ideas (University of Chicago Press, 1967), 32, 71–73.
53 Witek, “Filling In,” 150.
54 Phish, “Miss You,” by Trey Anastasio. Track 10 on Big Boat (JEMP Records, 2016). Lyrics retrieved from https://phish.net
---------------

------------------------------------------------------------

---------------

------------------------------------------------------------













