
 
 
 
 A Sheep in Wolf's Corset
 Timbral and Vocal Signifiers of Masculinity in 
 The Rocky Horror Picture/Glee Show

Steven Beverburg Reale
    Although initially a box-office flop, The Rocky Horror Picture Show (Jim Sharman, 1975) eventually became a cult hit and is now famous for the extensive audience participation developed by the midnight-movie crowd for whom initial showings of the film were its only audience.i The film's convoluted plot is well-known: Brad Majors and Janet Weiss, a young bourgeois couple, set out on a journey to announce their engagement to Dr Scott, the teacher responsible for introducing them, and are side-tracked by a flat tire. Having noticed a castle a few miles back, they trek through the rain in the hope of finding assistance. Instead, they happen upon a party in full swing, hosted by transvestite mad scientist, Dr Frank N. Furter. Frank refuses to help the couple with their car trouble and insists that they stay for the evening’s festivities in celebration of the birth of Rocky, a well-oiled and muscled specimen of masculinity whom Frank has created to be his lover. The reception is interrupted by Eddie, Frank’s previous lover and now brain-donor to Rocky, who emerges from the freezer where he was being stored; Frank murders Eddie in cold blood, to the consternation of Columbia, Frank’s groupie who also loved Eddie.  Throughout the course of the evening, Frank seduces Brad and Janet in turn. Later, by a double coincidence, Dr Scott arrives at the castle to investigate the disappearance of Eddie, who happens to be his nephew. Subsequently, Frank’s servants, Riff Raff and Magenta, unhappy with the excess of Frank’s lifestyle, murder him and his creation, reveal that they are aliens from another planet and that the castle is in fact a spaceship, and suggest that the humans leave before the castle launches for home. As the film ends, Brad, Janet and Dr Scott are seen crawling through the rubble of the castle’s foundation.
      One ostensibly plausible explanation for Rocky Horror's continued popularity is that it effectively opened a safe space for audience members to explore queer gender and sexuality. Since many fans read the film’s chorus of “Don’t dream it; be it!” as its overall message, the culture of the midnight showings of Rocky Horror allows and actively encourages otherwise socially deviant behaviours: for example, a straight, male fan can dress in drag without needing to identify as a transvestite. The recent homage to Rocky Horror on the television show Glee thus takes the position that the Show is an ideal vehicle for the personal expression of a group of self-described weirdos and misfits. 
      Yet, much commentary on the film has demonstrated that beneath the surface-level celebration of sexual desire and overt message of hedonism, the film instead preserves and reinforces an ethos of restraint and moderation.  For example, Raymond Ruble's psychoanalytic reading (1986, p. 164) positions Dr Scott as Super-ego, Riff Raff as Ego, and Frank as Id, and suggests that since the will of the Super-ego is enacted through the Ego, Rocky Horror really promotes a compromise: a sexual middle ground rather than the unbridled hypersexuality that characterizes Frank. Similarly, John Kilgore (1986, p. 156) reads Frank's murder as the reassertion of order and restraint upon the film’s ostensible celebration of sexuality. He writes, 'The film only seems to preach the gospel of absolute pleasure; in reality it acknowledges the existence of sensible limitations.'   Susan Purdie (1999, p.179) takes a stronger position, reminding us that any sexual middle ground promoted by Rocky Horror is fundamentally inscribed within a patriarchal ethos. Patrick T. Kinkade and Michael A. Katovich (1992, p. 192) argue that a central feature of the cult film is a two-fold process whereby normative societal values are first transgressed and then ultimately validated.  Regarding Rocky Horror, Kinkade and Katovich conclude:
The destruction of Frankenfurter’s world and Brad and Janet’s escape from it (presumably to wed) reaffirm the necessity of a heterosexual procreating society. Thus a conservative ideology contains Rocky Horror’s outrageous appearances—traditional norms are validated; Frankenfurter is merely a distraction (Kinkade and Katovich 1992, pp. 200-1).  
      
Film theorist Barry Grant (1991, p. 124) agrees, writing, 'The viewer ultimately gains the double satisfaction of both rejecting dominant cultural values and remaining safely inscribed within them.' If Rocky Horror is fundamentally a recuperation, rather than a rejection of such dominant cultural values, then a certain friction emerges when popular reception (including the Show's  appearance on Glee) adopts the film as a catalyst for Dionysian self-expression.
      Given that for many fans, the performative nature of the Rocky Horror experience is its primary draw—especially the practice of singing and dancing along and in dialogue with the film—it is surprising that the scholarly discussion has been relatively quiet with respect to the film's music. Histories of twentieth-century musical theatre typically trace a development from productions whose stories are merely vehicles for song-and-dance spectacle to those that craft a narrative to be fleshed-out by its musical numbers (see, for example, Boroff 1984). In the same way that operatic arias express emotional commentary on plot developments, the songs of Rocky Horror provide lucid glimpses into the characters' psyches. Importantly, while song lyrics might be able to express a character's conscious thoughts, they represent only one dimension of a musical utterance. Other dimensions, such as vocal timbre, instrumentation, genre, tempo, and meter, complete the utterance, signifying subconscious assumptions and motivations that are sublimated in the character's linguistic register. As Heather Laing has noted, film music, steeped in Romantic notions of the universality of purely musical communication, offers unmediated access to the subconscious, 'bypassing systems of critical censorship and rendering the audience susceptible to emotional affect' (2000, pp. 6-7). We can broaden the concept and suggest that the music can also bypass the character's systems of censorship, rendering him or her susceptible to inadvertently communicating emotional states of which he or she may not be consciously aware. The Show's music, undeniably its essential feature, relates a narrative missed by purely textual readings, as changes in the songs' extra-lyrical parameters provide critical indicators of its characters' development. When these parameters are modified, as they are on Glee, the extra-lyrical narrative will inevitably be altered as well. 
      
      Bildungsrockoper 
      Primarily, The Rocky Horror Picture Show, although clothed in eccentric trappings, functions in service to a patriarchal norm because its story falls comfortably within the novelistic genre of the Bildungsroman, a specific type of coming-of-age narrative centred, both in plot and in social function, on the subjectivity of a bourgeois, male protagonist.  Franco Moretti (2000) provides a thorough explanation of the genre, emphasizing that the nineteenth-century Bildungsroman focuses on a young protagonist who, through the course of the story’s journey, undergoes self-development to the point of achieving a sense of place, which is signalled by his marriage at the end.
      In Rocky Horror, Brad, a typical young, bourgeois protagonist (the narrator refers to Brad and Janet as 'normal kids') is an ideal character for such a development. Early in the Show, Brad’s naïveté is evident when he tries to reassure Janet that there is nothing to fear when he describes the Transylvanians as 'probably foreigners with ways different than our own. They may do some more…folk dancing.' Brad’s youthfulness is highlighted frequently when he finds himself haplessly emasculated, such as when Janet initially claims not to like men 'with too many muscles,' but, after witnessing Rocky’s strutting, loses her inhibitions and exclaims, 'I’m a muscle fan!' Likewise, when Brad voices his frustration with Frank for ignoring his request for help with the car, Frank sarcastically responds by saying, 'How forceful you are, Brad. Such a perfect specimen of manhood. So ... dominant.'
       Although Moretti’s history of the Bildungsroman ends with its collapse around the era of World War I, musicologist Judith Pereira (2006, pp. 228-9) argues that it found a revival in rock and roll music, in which 'a male subject, frequently androgynous, … undergoes an education and transformation through art, or, in the case of rock and roll, music.' Rocky Horror is included as an example of rock and roll Bildungsroman, but Pereira argues that the maturation no longer occurs within the boundaries of a bourgeois society but instead functions as a transformation to a more androgynous sensibility. Her position echoes Mark Siegel (1980, pp. 305-12), who explains the Show as a failed 'rite of intensification,' intended to move society forward to a new, bisexual state, and explores Brad’s experience as undergoing a similar 'rite of passage' on a microcosmic level. Although the Bildungsroman makes a compelling frame for analysis of Rocky Horror, I am convinced that Brad’s transformation is of a much more traditional nature than Pereira or Siegel suggest. Rather than causing Brad to develop an androgynous or bisexual sensibility, his night at Frank N. Furter’s castle will simply be one episode in his journey toward Bildung. 
      Running in parallel, or perhaps in chiasmus, to Brad’s coming-of-age is the narrative of Frank’s downfall—as Brad transitions from boyhood to manhood, Frank N. Furter transitions from masculine to feminine. The shifting of roles between Frank and Brad is a direct result of their interactions with one another throughout the course of the film. Brad, through confrontation with his complicated sexual desires, learns to accept his masculine agency, while Frank N. Furter, by forsaking his masculine agency and accepting femininity, precipitates his destruction.
	Rocky Horror's songs provide important clues about Brad’s initial youthfulness on the one hand and Frank’s initial masculinity on the other, in particular through the vocal timbres the characters adopt in their performances. In his article, 'Music and Male Hegemony,' John Shepherd (1987) discusses the means by which timbre defines gender roles in both classical and popular music. In doing so, he builds on Simon Frith and Angela McRobbie’s delineation of two common modes of male popular music acts: ‘cock rock’ and ‘teenybopper.’ Frith and McRobbie remark that both archetypes serve to reinforce heterosexuality; on the one hand, ‘cock rockers’ tend to appeal to males for their representations of power while on the other hand, 'teenyboppers' appeal to females by portraying an image of romance. (Frith and McRobbie, 1990, p. 374). Frith and McRobbie note that these modes are not necessarily exclusive: a male vocalist might occupy a space between the two, or else move from one mode to the other between songs. Their central point is that 'rock offers a framework within which male sexuality can find a range of acceptable, heterosexual expressions' (1990, p. 375).
Shepherd picks up the thread by discussing the vocal timbres specific to these two modes:
The typical ‘cock’ rock vocal sound is hard and rasping, produced overwhelmingly in the throat and mouth, with a minimum of recourse to the formants of the chest and head. … The typical sound of ‘the boy next door’ is … soft and warm [and] depends not so much on the use of formants in the chest as it does on the use of head tones (1987, 166).

Following Frith and McRobbie, Shepherd notes that performers will often change their vocal timbre in the middle of a song to indicate that the singer’s words are part of a dialogue, so that the timbre adapts to suit the changing context of the imagined conversation (1987, p. 171). Likewise, vocal timbre is dynamic in Rocky Horror: characters' internal developments can be highlighted through modal changes in their singing voices.
	At the beginning of the film, Brad’s vocal timbre is best described as 'boy next door.' In his first song, 'Dammit, Janet,' he sings with soft, warm head tones in a boyish register accompanied by strings, bells, and piano.  The combination of these timbres locates the song within a tradition of saccharine love songs, including Paul Anka's 'Puppy Love' (1960), David Cassidy's 1972 cover of The Association's 'Cherish,' Donny Osmond's 1972 cover of the Frankie Avalon song, 'Why?,' and the self-conscious parody in Paul McCartney's 'Silly Love Songs' (1976), performed with Wings. Indeed, 'Dammit, Janet' reads nicely alongside the Osmond cover, where he sings in a soft head voice accompanied by strings, bells, and the mellow, easy-listening sound of the flugelhorn.  The verses begin with statements of the singer's affection and fidelity that result because he loves the female addressee and she loves him.  Each statement of ‘I love you' and 'You love me' is echoed by Osmond's brothers who sing backup:
I'll never let you go.  Why? Because I love you. (I love you)
I'll always love you so.  Why? Because you love me. (You love me)
	'Dammit, Janet' begins with strings, piano, voice, and percussion.  The first tone of the song is a section of orchestral strings playing a tremolo B¼-major chord in their upper register, which is immediately followed by a spoken introduction: Brad, shyly and haltingly, addresses Janet and expresses his admiration for her. The verses of the song consist of Brad rhythmically speaking phrases designed to set up increasingly playful and unexpected rhymes for the word 'Janet,' which are answered by ugly nasal intonations—a parody of the call-and-response technique used in the verses in 'Why?'—by Riff-raff, Magenta, and Columbia, who are disguised as church workers.  The last line of each verse is a titular refrain, which Brad emphasizes by singing the words on pitch, amidst a mostly spoken performance:
		
      The river was deep but I swam it (Janet!)
		The future is ours so let's plan it (Janet!)
		So please don't tell me to can it (Janet!)
		I've one thing to say and that's 'Dammit, Janet, I love you!'

		The road was long but I ran it (Janet!)
		There's a fire in my heart and you fan it (Janet!)
		If there's one fool for you then I am it (Janet!)
		I've one thing to say and that's 'Dammit, Janet, I love you!'

	At the bridge, with an outburst of high melodic strings and bells, Brad shifts to a falsetto register and begins singing in earnest to Janet the music transcribed as Figure 1.  The passage's instrumental accompaniment includes bells, an important timbral signifier, as they refer to the ‘wedding bells’ of Brad and Janet's imminent engagement as well as to the church that forms the background of the scene.
	The bulk of the film's next song, 'Over at the Frankenstein Place,' is a duet between Brad and Janet.  As in 'Dammit, Janet,' piano, strings, voice, and percussion are the first timbres we hear.  Janet sings the first verse solo:
		In the velvet darkness 
		Of the blackest night
		Burning bright
		There's a guiding star
		No matter what or who you are.

After the verse, Brad joins for the song's chorus, transcribed as Figure 2. It is notable that Brad’s and Janet’s vocal registers are very close to one another.  Throughout virtually the entire song, they sing within a sixth and at one point they even sing in unison.  
	Much like Brad's solo number, this duet locates itself within the tradition of soft rock love duets of the 1960's and 1970's, including Frankie Avalon and Annette Funicello's duet  'I Think, You Think' from Beach Blanket Bingo (William Asher, 1965), Sonny and Cher's 'I Got You Babe' (1965), and the duets that Donny Osmond sang with his sister, Marie. In Donny and Marie's 1974 cover of 'I'm Leaving It (All) Up To You,' the duo sings in a similar register as Brad and Janet, also within a sixth of each other, but predominantly in close thirds (see Figure 3).  Notice how Donny Osmond stays on the B in m. 6 of the transcription, while Marie Osmond sings melodically above it.  This is similar to the technique used in 'Over at the Frankenstein Place,' in which Brad sustains a C# in m. 5 of the example, while Janet sings melodically above it.
	The close register in these duets has the effect of infantilizing the male singer.  Since women and boys typically sing in similar vocal ranges, the close range of these duets gives a youthful, non-threatening quality to the performance. Also important: both of the Osmond songs as well as Brad and Janet's first two numbers rely heavily on strings, a timbral signifier far removed from the world of rock and roll within Frank’s castle, hinting at a musical wholesomeness that Brad and Janet are leaving behind. 
       In contrast to the gentle, boy-next-door persona constructed around Brad by means of his vocal timbre and the instruments orbiting his voice—piano, strings, bells—Frank steps into the film with distorted guitars and sleazy trumpets and saxophones outlining a standard rock and roll chord progression in a song called 'Sweet Transvestite.'  Far removed from the world of Donny Osmond, Frank's songs, in vocalism, instrumentation, and harmonic structure, usher in a sonic world that resembles The Rolling Stones 1971 song, 'Brown Sugar.'ii
      It is significant that Frank is introduced with a rock and roll song that specifically foregrounds transvestism.  Literary critic and gender theorist Marjorie Garber notes that it is often through his command of feminine gender signals that the male transvestite can assert and enhances his masculinity.   'Paradoxically,' Garber writes, 'the male transvestite represents the extreme limit case of “male subjectivity,” “proving” that he is male against the most extraordinary odds.' By contrast, the transsexual does not wish to prove that he is male—he simply wishes to be a woman (1992, p. 96).
      Robert Walser’s work on heavy metal makes a strong case for Garber’s findings, and it applies quite well to Rocky Horror, since the music in the film is written in the tradition of 1970’s rock and roll, which Walser indicates is a forerunner to the heavy metal of the 1980's with which he is primarily concerned (1993, pp. 9-11). Writing on the phenomenon of 'glam rock,' a heavy metal genre marked by male musicians wearing makeup and other feminine accoutrements, Walser argues that 'androgynous musicians and fans appropriate the visual signs of the feminine identity in order to claim the powers of spectacularity for themselves.' He continues: 
Colorful makeup; elaborate, ostentatious clothes; hair that is unhandily long and laboriously styled—these are the excessive signs of one gender’s role as spectacle. But onstage in a metal show, these signs are invested with the power and glory normally reserved to patriarchy (1993, 128-31).

      Likewise, Frank’s transvestism functions to heighten his masculinity regardless of the feminine signals he may be appropriating. Consider the still from the scene of his wedding to Rocky in Figure 4. Their procession to the 'bridal suite' is saturated with mixed gender signals. Rocky, with gold-lamé trunks and rippling muscles, certainly looks masculine, particularly when juxtaposed with Frank’s corset, stiletto heels, and makeup; and Frank is standing on Rocky’s right, traditionally the bride’s side as the couple exits the church. Yet it is Frank who offers his arm to Rocky and, since his creation doesn’t know better, places Rocky’s arm within his own. Frank then struts into the bridal suite while Rocky shuffles alongside. When they arrive, however, Frank jumps into Rocky’s arms, once again signalling a reversal in gender roles. Finally, when we later return to the bower, we see Rocky chained face-down on the bed, indicating that he was the receptive party in the consummation. Although the gender signals between Rocky and Frank alternate in polarity, there is a constant throughout the sequence: it is Frank, regardless of which gender signal he adopts at any given moment, who is invariably the dominant party, as it is Frank who determines at which moments he and Rocky will be charged as masculine or feminine. Thus, like glam rockers, Frank appropriates femininity as a transvestite (not as a transsexual) because his masculinity offers the freedom to make such an appropriation. Ultimately, Frank 'wears' femininity, but is not construed as feminine. 
      Like Brad’s, Frank N. Furter’s vocal timbre contributes to the affect of his initial masculinity, and it fits Shepherd’s description of cock rock. As an example, consider Frank’s song, 'I Can Make You a Man,' which ends the first act, transcribed in Figure 5. In contrast to Brad’s soft, airy head voice, Frank sings in a full chest voice with a great deal of power. His tone is brash, deep, and gravelly, even if his vocal range is nearly as high as Brad’s. Frank’s cock-rock voice communicates complete control as his blasphemous words claim utter potency: the power to 'make a man.' Also worth noting in this scene is the closing guitar lick, which echoes Mendelssohn’s wedding march, first played as a transition from 'Science Fiction Double Feature' to the marriage that begins the film proper, thus providing a musical frame for the act. Initially played in a traditional, church-organ rendition, it is here transformed into a heavy rock idiom, signifying the progression from decency to decadence that has taken place over the course of the first act.
	Fluid Boundaries
      In the second act, Brad's innocent youthfulness and Frank's hard-cutting, albeit corset-wearing, masculinity become fluid and interweave with each other as the program of the Bildungsroman unfolds. This explicitly happens when Frank dresses as Brad and sneaks into bed with Janet to seduce her, but the real turning point for both of these characters occurs when Frank disguises himself as Janet and seduces Brad in a scene that almost exactly reprises the previous seduction: the set is the same, with masculine blue lighting substituting for feminine pink, and the dialogues that open each seduction are nearly identical. The effect is comical, an extreme and overt example of what Rick Altman has called a 'dual-focus narrative,' in which, in contrast to traditional narrative structures that situate plot events along a causal chain, scenes in the musical are paired to create parallel plot events for the male and female leads (1987, pp. 28-45).  Both sequences entail Frank first invading a bedroom and then mounting its occupant, signifying his dominant role in both cases. In seducing Janet, Frank occupies a normatively masculine, heterosexual role in the encounter. By contrast, even though Frank initially mounts Brad, he ultimately only performs oral sex on him, and in so doing, claims for himself a submissive role in the encounter. This is the turning point of the chiasmus. Upon completion of the sex act, Brad transitions to manhood and Frank, for the first time in the film, actually adopts, rather than simply simulates, a submissive role, and begins to transition into the femininity that will eventually become his downfall. 
      It is at that very moment that the tight control Frank enjoyed over the goings-on in the castle begins to unravel. While Frank is in bed with Brad, his servants, Riff Raff and Magenta, betray him by frightening his creation into running away and Rocky betrays Frank by having sex with Janet.  As control is an important hallmark of masculinity, Frank’s gradually weakening command signals his advancing emasculation. 
      Frank’s regression is more evident when he uses a ‘sonic transducer’ to glue Janet’s, Brad’s and Dr Scott’s feet to the ground. Dr Scott describes the sonic transducer as a machine that can break down matter and project it through time and space; however, Frank is not interested in sending his captives to another planet. Instead, he uses a device labelled 'Medusa' to turn them into statues, then dresses them in corsets and has them perform in a floor show. Rather than destroying Brad, Janet, and Dr Scott (which he no doubt would be capable of, having murdered Eddie with an ice pick) he plays dress-up with them—he is essentially playing with dolls, an activity with particularly feminine connotations.iii
      Frank’s final transformation is evident during the floor show and the two songs that immediately precede his death: 'Rose Tint My World' and 'I’m Going Home.' After Columbia, Rocky, Brad, and Janet have all sung their verses in 'Rose Tint My World,' the rock-and-roll instrumentation changes and is replaced by horn fanfare and string interlude, after which Frank sings the following lines:
      	Whatever happened to Fay Wray?
      	That delicate satin-draped frame?
      	As it clung to her thigh
      	How I started to cry
      	‘Cause I wanted to be dressed just the same.
      
While Frank sings deeply and cleanly from his chest in his earlier cock-rock numbers, here his voice is sung predominantly from his head with a breathy quality, in a manner nearer to what Shepherd refers to as 'woman-as-sex-object' vocalism. In this mode, the vocal timbre becomes 'closed off with a certain edge, a certain vocal sheen that is quite different from the male-appropriated, hard core timbre typical of cock rock (1987, p. 167). Shepherd cites Shirley Bassey singing 'Big Spender' as an example of 'woman-as-sex-object' vocalism. 
	The change of instrumentation is also significant. This song has only the second occurrence of strings since 'Over At The Frankenstein Place,' and it is notable that the first occurrence was during 'Touch-a Touch-a Touch Me,' sung by Janet during her sexual awakening. The usage of strings here thus no longer refers to the wholesomeness of Brad and Janet’s first two songs; instead, the film suggests that the instrumentation is now to be connected with feminine sexuality.
      'Rose Tint My World' and 'I’m Going Home' are the only two songs in which Frank expresses internal feeling; the regret and sentimentality of these two numbers, and the subdued tone and wide vibrato Frank uses, resembles Judy Garland's 1963 performance of 'When Your Lover Has Gone.'iv  In contrast to the expression of control and dominance that drives all of his earlier songs, Frank's final numbers are poignant and sorrowful, his voice quivers and breaks with emotionality. Note that Frank’s wish to be dressed like Fay Wray is strong enough to make him cry; this is a departure from his earlier transvestism, when he used women’s clothing to emphasize his masculine power. 
      What are we to make, then, of the fact that these songs immediately precede Frank’s death? Whereas his earlier appropriations of femininity functioned in service of an indisputably masculine identity, now it seems that Frank ceases to appropriate femininity and truly becomes feminine; Frank has ceased to be a transvestite and has become transsexual. As Rebecca Bell-Metereau emphasizes:
In the majority of films of the past twenty years, female impersonation has taken on the darker hue of psychosis. The imitation of male characteristics generally results in increased freedom, sexual appeal, power, or prestige for the woman, but if this change results in loss of status for the male, it is usually punished (1999, p. 3).

And so it is punished here. Frank’s murder should be understood less as the penalty for sexual excess, but, even more problematically, for foraying too far into the feminine. Frank precipitates his downfall and ultimate demise by forsaking his masculinity and thereby relinquishing control.  The still in Figure 6 is taken moments before Frank’s death; he no longer carries any signifiers of control, but only those of vulnerability. His eyes are wide and fearful with running make-up, and his hair is pulled back and is soaking wet. His stance is slouched and the camera, behind Riff Raff and Magenta, towers above him. Frank no longer appropriates feminine signals to highlight his masculine power; he has become feminine, the real crime for which Riff Raff murders him.
      As noted above, control is an important theme in Rocky Horror; Riff Raff alluded to its importance in the opening verse of 'Time Warp,' when he sings: 'I’ve got to keep control.' Frank has only been able to occupy the position as master of the house as long as he has been able to maintain control there. Indeed, it is unlikely that Riff Raff, whom the audience sees suffer at the hands of Frank’s abuse, would have been able to carry out the murder prior to Frank's feminization, and yet his line in 'Time Warp' tells us that from the very start that he has been standing by as a source of control at the mansion; it is for this fundamental reason that Riff Raff must be Frank’s murderer.v 
      While Frank transitions away from the masculinity that he initially exhibits, Brad transitions from boyhood to manhood. Like Frank’s, Brad’s transformation is evident in his singing voice, and, significantly, his notable lack thereof. In her article, 'On Musical Performances of Gender and Sex,' Suzanne Cusick (1999) explores the singing habits of children. Although infants and toddlers of both sexes are capable of producing melodies even before they are able to speak and will regularly sing until puberty, when boys find their voices beginning to change, many choose to stop singing rather than learn how to navigate the necessary changes in vocal production. By contrast, women, whose voices are culturally construed as less subject to pubescent change, will on average continue to sing throughout their lives. 
      Cusick suggests as a possible explanation for this phenomenon that the mouth serves as an important bodily boundary through which expression passes in the form of ‘Speech’ and ‘Song’. Song, which must be produced within the core of the body, requires deeper demands for discipline than Speech, which is produced mostly in the mouth and throat. She then raises the following questions:
Is the male refusal to re-learn Song somehow related to the prevailing idea that masculinity is about being fully individuated, body and soul? with the borders of the body policed so that its interior spaces will not be subjected to penetration? not even by the deep-body disciplines Song requires (1999, pp. 31-33)?vi 

      Perhaps as a result of Brad’s development in the Bildungsroman, he has fully internalized masculine anxieties toward penetration;vii although he had eagerly sung in a teenybopper mode in the first two songs of the film, he suddenly stops singing. He will not sing solo again until much later in the movie and then twice: both times after his sexual encounter with Frank. The first time he sings will be in his rage against Frank for threatening and humiliating Janet in 'Wise Up,' transcribed in Figure 7.  Brad’s forceful, deep-chest-voice—a far cry from the boyishness of his earlier singing—suggests that this performance is a spontaneous outburst of song as a result of a momentary loss of emotional control, such as those described by Laing (2000, pp. 7-11). Brad, although having attained manhood, is so upset that he, contrary to conventional gender norms, cannot keep his emotions in check and thus begins singing. 
      Brad will sing one more time in the Show, but only under the control of Frank’s sonic transducer, in the ensemble number, 'Rose Tint My World,' transcribed in Figure 8. Brad’s song begins with resistance to his new-found sexual awakening, but he ultimately accepts and indulges it. As his emotional response changes, so does his vocalism: he begins closer to a 'boy next door' mode and morphs into a growly cock-rock vocalism that includes sophistications such as grace notes and blue notes. In a sense, Brad’s verse presents a microcosm of his character’s development throughout the film.
      In both instances, Brad notably departs from the 'boy next door' mode he used earlier and moves into the growlier chest voice typical of cock rock. Also, Brad’s motivation for singing has changed. While he sang of his own accord in 'Dammit, Janet' and 'Over at the Frankenstein Place,' his later instances of singing are the result of outside forces. In the one, he sings out of a strong emotional response. In the other, he sings in the floor show under Frank’s mind control. Brad’s change in vocal timbre from 'boy next door' to cock rock clearly demonstrates a transformation in his character—so might his reluctance to sing in the later parts of the Show.
      That Brad’s singing behaviour should change so dramatically as his character matures sheds surprising light on the fact that two songs were deleted from the initial U.S. release of Rocky Horror, both of which feature Brad singing in his soft teenybopper voice. One, a song called 'Superheroes,' occurs at the end of the film, just after the castle blasts off. In it, Brad and Janet both sing about the trauma of what has happened to them throughout the course of the film. Some newer editions of Rocky Horror do insert this scene back into the film action.
      The filmmakers also deleted a song called 'Once in a While.' Brad sings this song immediately after his sexual encounter with Frank, and it communicates his feelings of regret and guilt while the film incorporates a montage of scenes of Brad and Janet from earlier in the film. This scene has not been reinserted into the action of the movie, although it is included as bonus footage in the '25th Anniversary Special Edition' DVD release. By one account the song was removed because its pacing and theme were deemed incongruous with the rest of the songs in the Show (Whittaker 1998, p. 156). In response to a question posed by interviewer Scott Michaels about 'Once in a While,' Barry Bostwick, who plays Brad in the film, replies:
I was disappointed when I found out they cut it, but I also understood it. It was the wrong song in the wrong place in the show in the beginning. It wasn’t a time when you wanted to sit back and hear a ballad. You wanted to just move forward in the film (Michaels and Evans 2002, pp. 276-7).

The song's incongruity in terms of pacing and theme may be more severe than Bostwick's explanation suggests: one way that Brad’s transition from boyhood to manhood becomes evident in the Show is that he entirely ceases to sing solo after the moment of transition with the exception of the two instances when he is being acted upon by forces outside his control, and then sings in a cock rock mode, rather than his previously established teenybopper mode. Perhaps the reason that 'Once in a While' never made it to the finished movie was because it would have been inappropriate for Brad to sing once he had experienced a sexual encounter with Frank; perhaps the reason that it was 'the wrong song in the wrong place' is precisely because grown men are not supposed to sing.viii
      The end of the film provides a final justification for a reading in connection with Bildungsroman.  In his celebrated book, The Celluloid Closet, LGBT activist and film historian Vito Russo (1987) makes the case that throughout film history, movie characters who are (or are supposed to be) gay frequently die before the movie ends.  Russo even includes an expansive necrology as an appendix to his book. It is striking, then, that of the four male characters we understand as having engaged in homosexual sex—Frank, Brad, Rocky, and Eddie—Brad is the only one to survive.ix
      Perhaps this is an example of a trend that Russo points out, whereby some films treat 'homosexuality as the stuff of adolescence, habits to be discarded when one is ready to face adulthood and maturity' (1987, p. 241). That possibility strengthens the Bildungsroman reading, as Brad’s sexual encounter with Frank may be understood as just one of the adventures he undergoes as he comes of age. Because the sex act in which he engaged was homosexual in nature, Brad’s transition to manhood might be instead understood, at least within the scope of the film, as incomplete. Instead of fully becoming a man, Brad’s development in the film would only be part of the Bildungsroman; by the end of the movie, perhaps Brad has only progressed to an experimental adolescent state. In this reading, one would eventually expect Brad to complete his transition to manhood, renounce decadent sexuality and live within a proper, heteronormative marriage with Janet.x It is also a signal of Brad’s agency that he has the freedom to engage in homosexual activity without suffering the penalty that the other characters faced. Brad’s freedom to have sex with Frank is the same freedom that Frank once had, as a masculine transvestite, to appropriate femininity without suffering femininity’s own social penalties.
      Glee's Willful Misreading
	On October 26, 2010, the Fox television network aired a Rocky Horror-themed episode of Glee, a series about a high-school show choir and their teacher, Will. Fan and critical responses were mixed, and there was much complaint (including, it seems, from creator Richard O'Brien) that the episode substituted the word 'sin-sational' for 'transsexual' in the song 'Sweet Transvestite,' suggesting that the musical is too risqué for prime-time, and needlessly sanitized a television program that already deals with high-school sexuality on a regular basis (see, for example, Stuff 2010 and Zoller Seitz 2010). Yet, close study of Rocky Horror's vocalism demonstrates that the film has always already neutered its own risqué themes through adherence to an unexpectedly bourgeois narrative. Thus, critique of 'The Rocky Horror Glee Show' on the basis that it whitewashes the film's celebration of sexuality assumes an already conflicted and problematic reading of Rocky Horror. Perhaps extending our extra-lyrical musical study of Rocky Horror to its incarnation on Glee can help resolve this apparent contradiction.
	A particularly significant feature of the episode is the fact that the glee club's production of Rocky Horror begins as a strict homage to the film—as a nod to the film's fans, for example, Barry Bostwick and Meatloaf, who played Brad and Eddie respectively in the film, have cameo appearances in the episode. The episode opens with an explicit parody of the film: a pair of bright red lips against a black background sings 'Science Fiction Double Feature,' and the title of the episode, 'The Rocky Horror Glee Show,' appears in the same dripping-blood font as the film's title.  Immediately afterward, the episode begins in medias res with a rehearsal of 'Over at the Frankenstein Place.'  The sets are a faithful recreation of the corresponding scene in the film—the backdrop includes a castle modelled on the one in the film, complete with the domed roof of the laboratory and imposing cupola from which Riff-Raff sings his verse.xi Students Rachel and Finn enter the stage through a gate marked 'Enter at your own risk,' just as had appeared in the film. 
	Most of the casting choices in the early part of the episode are made to closely replicate the film. Rachel and Finn, the perennial leads of Glee, are immediately cast as Brad and Janet, their 'good kids' personae making them without question the obvious choice for the roles. Arnie, a physically disabled student, offers: 'I'll be playing the guy in the wheelchair.'  Similarly, Carl, a local dentist and Will's rival for the affections of Emma, the school's guidance counsellor, auditions for the role of Eddie.  Carl is played by John Stamos, who is well-known for his role on the show Full House as the rock-and-rolling Uncle Jesse, and so he is a perfect fit for the role of Eddie, originally played by the rock-and-roll singer Meatloaf.
	Like 'Over at The Frankenstein Place,' the episode's next song, 'Dammit Janet,' is an aural recreation of the film's performance.  The introduction is virtually identical: strings play the tremolo B¼-major chord in a high register, and Finn, playing Brad, speaks his lines, 'Janet?/I have something to say/I really like the/skillful way/you beat the other girls/to the bride's bouquet,' with the same awkward pacing of Barry Bostwick's performance.  In the body of the song, students Mercedes, Quinn, and Kurt interject, 'Janet!' at the end of each of Finn's lines with the same atonal, nasal quality used by their counterparts in the film.  During the bridge, the strings return and the melody is punctuated by bells, just as in the film version.  Even though this scene is presented as a rehearsal in the choir room, Finn's choreography is based on the original: as he sings, 'The road was long but I ran it,' he runs backward, as did Barry Bostwick in his performance.  This is a reference to the audience participation rituals, as fans typically interject 'backwards' in place of the 'Janet' rhyme.  Similarly, he draws a heart on the classroom's whiteboard during his performance, just as Barry Bostwick drew a heart on the church door in the film, which is another feature that caught the eye of the film's fans, who frequently sing, 'I've one thing to say and that's: Only assholes write on doors!' at the appropriate moment.
	Up to this point, the episode has borrowed musical and visual elements from the original film, making it clear that the glee club's performance is intended to be a strict recreation of the movie. As in Frank's seductions of Janet and Brad, we are invited to locate The Rocky Horror Picture Show alongside The Rocky Horror Glee Show in a dual-focus narrative writ large. For Altman, the dual-focus narrative privileges the conceptual over the causal by placing the male and female leads in corresponding scenes, so as to engage them in a dialectic that will be resolved in their marriage (1987, p. 19). By faithfully adhering to the design and staging of the film, Glee initially signals its correspondence to Rocky Horror, so that when it departs from its source text, it can position itself as its dialectical antithesis. 
	The fundamental change to the source text occurs when Mercedes, a female, African-American student asks for the opportunity to audition for the role of Frank: 
I was reading the script yesterday and it said, 'Don't dream it; be it,' and it's my dream to play a lead role, so I figure, why not me?  I mean, I'll be all kinds of crazy-sexy in that outfit and I can reinterpret the number a little bit, make it more modern.

This is a pivotal moment in the episode, as it represents the first suggestion that Rocky Horror can be subject to reinterpretation.  Although this acknowledgment is treated somewhat farcically in the episode—obnoxious cheerleading coach Sue Sylvester elbows her way into an assistant director role, and suggests numerous rewrites to help improve the musical's 'poor pacing'—the recasting of Frank as a woman has a profound effect on the ethos of the story.
	If the ostensible message of The Rocky Horror Picture Show is a clarion-call for self-expression; a celebration of an individual's decision to not Dream It, but to Be It; and a celebration of socially deviant physical pleasures—and it is precisely the change in Frank's vocal timbre from masculine to feminine that gives the lie to this reading, replacing it with a socially normative moral of a masculine imperative—then what happens when Frank's voice is established as feminine at the outset?
	After Mercedes is cast as Frank, we see a rehearsal of 'Sweet Transvestite.'  Although the set and costume designs mimic the film, the affect of the song is completely altered by the casting change.  Curry's rendition was a brash, masculine display of 1970's rock androgyny and a grotesque (to Brad and Janet) display of queer male sexuality. Mercedes's version, infused with the melodic trappings of gospel and soul and skyrocketing ornamentations in her highest register, more closely resembles 1960's and 70's performances of female empowerment, such as Aretha Franklin's 'Think,' Gladys Knight's 'If I Were Your Woman,' or Tina Turner's 'Proud Mary' (a performance of the last featured Mercedes in a different episode of Glee). In contrast to the film, which establishes Frank as a masculine figure who then succumbs too much to a feminine self-identification, if Frank is established from the outset as embodying empowered femininity, then no corresponding downfall is plausible.  If Frank is a woman, then the Show must have a different ending, which is precisely what happens on Glee.
	The finale of the episode is a performance of the 'Time Warp.'  This is perhaps the most famous song from the film, a rousing, high-energy rock-and-roll dance number.  At midnight shows, fans jump out of their seats to dance and sing along with the characters on the screen. As a result, the 'Time Warp' represents the climax of the Rocky Horror experience, as after this point, the audience’s energy begins to wane, leading toward what Purdie refers to as a 'recollection of order' in the events both on-screen and in the auditorium:  'Rocky Horror crowds characteristically go home fairly quietly and would not be allowed to repeat their experiences if they did not' (1992, p. 181). If there is a moment of the film in which the ethos of indulgent self-expression and hedonism is most highly celebrated, it is during the 'Time Warp.'  Its appearance as the finale of the episode moves the climax from the first half (as it appears in the film) to the end, replacing a morality play, in which Frank's sexual excess is punished by his murder, with an actual celebration of self-expression.  Mercedes performs as Frank in the 'Time Warp' at the end of the episode, even though he is not introduced in the film until the next scene, because Glee is ironically recuperating the manifest 'Don't dream it; Be it' ethos from the Bildungsroman morality tale of the original film. Glee cleverly misprises the traditional coming-of-age story in terms of the much-celebrated reading of individual self-expression. In other words, Glee does not whitewash Rocky Horror because Rocky Horror already whitewashes itself, and in fact enacts the unbowdlerised Rocky Horror story that is lauded by its reception history. Seen in this light, the change in lyric from 'transsexual' to 'sin-sational' gains a subversive edge; this ostensibly pragmatic decision to make the episode’s content appear appropriate for family viewership—which we can surely read as extra-diegetic, as the characters in Glee likely hear themselves sing the original lyrics—is a mere mask for the episode's salacity. The Rocky Horror fan disappointed that Glee diluted the film's celebration of sexuality might be consoled to know that Glee provides precisely that vision of Rocky Horror believed to be absent.
	Indeed, the popular misprision of the show is at the foundation of the episode's crux: Will decided to have the glee club perform Rocky Horror entirely as an attempt to win back the affections of Emma. Purporting to be concerned about the discomfort of the student cast to play Rocky, Will decides to cast himself in the part and asks for Emma's assistance in rehearsing 'Touch-a Touch-a Touch Me' (a patently disingenuous request: since Rocky has but one line in the song, Will obviously does not need help rehearsing the scene). By placing Emma in the role of Janet for the song where she succumbs to physical pleasure and gives herself to the monster, Will hopes to replicate the diegetic seduction in the real world. Emma, who has throughout the series been presented as modest and prudish, mirrors Janet's persona and sings with the same soft timbre (Shepherd's 'woman-as-nurturer') used by Susan Sarandon in the film. Club members Santana and Brittney, who espy the entire episode from the classroom window, replicate Magenta and Columbia, who, in the film, watch the seduction over the castle's video monitors. When Emma, playing Janet, sings, 'I've only ever kissed before,' the pair of cheerleaders provide Magenta and Columbia's comedic observation about Janet's virginity—'You mean she's …?' 'Uh huh.'—and sing the final verse of the song to make fun of Emma/Janet, just as the pair in the film did. 
	The seduction almost works. Emma gets swept away in the eroticism of the scene, even going as far as to remove Will's shirt. The end of the scene also replicates the end of the scene from the film. Alternating between top-down shots of Emma-as-Janet writhing in sexual pleasure on a classroom table are point-of-view shots from her perspective of each of the Show's characters singing 'Creature of the Night.'xii The crucial point is that Will's decision to recreate the film, rather than produce a new interpretation of an old classic, is entirely tied to his desire to use the film's ostensible celebration of sexual excess to coax Emma away from her stable, 'good kids' relationship with Carl into sharing his blissful fantasy of erotic pleasure.
	In Will's final monologue, he apologizes to the club for his selfish motivations:
I was wrong.  Rocky Horror is not about pushing boundaries or making an audience accept a certain rebellious point of view. Those were my reasons for doing it, and they aren't worth risking it for what we have here.  And when I was younger, and they started midnight shows of Rocky Horror, it wasn't for envelope-pushers; it was for outcasts, people on the fringes who had no place left to go but were searching for someplace, anyplace where they felt like they belonged.  Sound familiar?  The truth is, with that perspective, Rocky Horror is the perfect show for this club. … We're still going to perform Rocky Horror.  We're just not doing it for an audience.  We're doing it for ourselves.

      From the start of the series, Glee has been explicitly about the struggles of the kids who don't fit in, exactly the audience that made Rocky Horror into a cult phenomenon.  The vision of Rocky Horror that the students in Glee celebrate is precisely that willful misreading of the Show that purports to celebrate individual expression in an environment that has labelled them as misfits.
	Doing the 'Time Warp' Again
      Through the analysis of vocal timbre, song genre, and instrumentation, this study has demonstrated how The Rocky Horror Picture Show affects a subversive, prurient demeanour while engaging in an indoctrination of conventional sexual ethics; while conversely, the producers of Glee engaged in ostensibly prudish censorship while recreating the film's overt lascivious countenance. Rocky Horror's musical numbers add important evidence to the debate about the film’s relationship to the values of sexuality and gender that prevail in our culture, and so they ought to be considered essential interpretive data for a viewer’s understanding of the film.
      Throughout the course of the film, Brad Majors’s vocalism has traced his transition from boyhood into, if not manhood, then an experimental adolescent phase indicative of the onset of sexual maturation. We also fully expect him to emerge from the chrysalis of the rubble where Frank N. Furter’s castle once stood as a straight, bourgeois man: a model of culturally prescribed masculinity. Similarly, Frank N. Furter’s vocalism traces his progression from transvestite to transsexual that is his ultimate undoing. Study of the film’s music provides a reading that seems to defy the film’s overt chorus of 'Don’t dream it, be it' by suggesting to us that the freedom to do so only exists as a privilege of masculine agency. Ironically, Frank did not need the complicated scientific apparatus and secret knowledge of life to make himself a man: his hard-edged persona and cock-rock vocal timbre had served that end. Brad learned that the cost of making himself a man was the cessation of singing.
      It is perhaps these lessons that help explain how and why Rocky Horror rose to the level of cult phenomenon. If the film ultimately reinforces masculine agency, then straight, corset-wearing male fans do not attend showings of the film to celebrate sexual excess but to celebrate their own agency. As Studlar puts it, ‘In spite of his feminine attire and “swishy” ways, Frank remains a transvestite figure with whom males can safely identify without endangering the power base of their prescribed masculinity’ (1989, p. 8). Yet, Studlar acknowledges that most fans seem only to identify with the dominant, forceful Frank, not the 'vulnerable, feminized' Frank (1989, p. 10); with Frank the transvestite, but not Frank the transsexual. Thus, the fans ultimately have the freedom to dress in drag for the evening, but to then go home, back to their usual lifestyles. Locke writes:
When the evening is over, … the intensity of the audience’s unabashed confidence and joy in themselves and in the vivid world of Rocky Horror will dissipate. Most of the participants will re-enter their ordinary contexts and assume their conventional roles as high school students, librarians, shopkeepers, accountants, and countless others in mundane professions. They have experienced a temporary transformation but it will show no outward signs of any permanent change in their lives (1991, p. 1).
 
Indeed, their ability to return home unchanged after a performance of Rocky Horror signals the very agency that Frank enjoyed at the beginning of the film. They can wear and mimic Frank’s appropriations of femininity—they can even belt out the 'Time Warp' with any vocal timbre they choose—and they can do so without compromising their claims to masculinity. By contrast, to truly give oneself over to absolute pleasure carries the high cost of forsaking control, and thus, of forsaking masculinity. Glee performed the fan-idealized vision of The Rocky Horror Picture Show in all its gender-bending, socially-deviant glory. Should we not have expected an outraged response?
References
Altman, R. 1987. The American Film Musical. Bloomington, IN and Indianapolis, IN: Indiana University Press.
Aviram, A.F., 1992. Postmodern Gay Dionysus: Dr Frank N. Furter. Journal of Popular Culture, 26(3), pp. 183-192.
Bell-Metereau, R., 1993. Hollywood Androgyny.  2nd ed. New York: Columbia University Press.
Biamonte, N., 2010. Triadic Modal and Pentatonic Patterns in Rock Music. Music Theory Spectrum 32(2), pp. 95-110.
Boroff, E., 1984. Origin of Species: Conflicting Views of American Musical Theater History, American Music 2(4), pp. 101-12.
Cusick, S.G., 1999. On Musical performances of Gender and Sex. In: E. Barkin and L. Hamessley, eds. 1999. Audible Traces: Gender, Identity, and Music. Zürich: Carciofoli Verlagshaus, pp. 25-48.
Eichler, R., 1987. In the Romantic Tradition: Frankenstein and The Rocky Horror Picture Show. In M. Gassenmeier and N.H. Platz, eds. 1987. Beyond the Suburbs of the Mind: Exploring English Romanticism. Essen: Verlag Die Blaue Eule, pp. 95-114.
Everett, W., 2004. Making Sense of Rock's Tonal Systems, Music Theory Online 10(4), [online] Available at <http://www.mtosmt.org/issues/mto.04.10.4/mto.04.10.4.w_everett.html [Accessed 28 May, 2011].
Frith, S. and McRobbie, A. 1978. Rock and Sexuality. Reprinted in S. Frith and A. Goodwin, eds. On Record: Rock, Pop, and the Written Word. New York: Pantheon Books, pp. 371-89.
Garber, M., 1992. Vested Interests: Cross-dressing & Cultural Desire. New York: Routledge.
Grant, B. 1991. Science Fiction Double Feature: Ideology in the Cult Film. In J.P. Telotte, ed. 1991. The Cult Film Experience. Austin: University of Texas Press, pp. 122-37.
Hoberman, J. and Rosenbaum, J., 1983. Midnight Movies. New York: Da Capo Press.
Kessler, K., 2010. Destabilizing the Hollywood Musical: Music, Masculinity and Mayhem.  New York: Palgrave Macmillan.
Kilgore, J. Sexuality and Identity in The Rocky Horror Picture Show. In D. Palumbo, ed. 1986. Eros in the Mind’s Eye. Westport, CT: Greenwood Press, pp. 151-9.
Kinkade, P.T. and Katovich, M.A., 1992. Toward a Sociology of Cult Films: Reading Rocky Horror. The Sociological Quarterly, 33(2), pp. 191-209.
Knapp, R., 2006. The American Musical and the Performance of Personal Identity. Princeton and Oxford: Princeton University Press.
Laing, H. 2000. Emotion by Numbers: Music, Song and the Musical. In B. Marshall and R. Stilwell, eds. 2000. Musicals: Hollywood & Beyond. Exeter, U.K. and Portland, OR: Intellect Books, pp. 5-13.
Locke, L., 1999. ‘Don’t Dream It, Be It:’ The Rocky Horror Picture Show as Cultural Performance. New Directions in Folklore 3(3), [online] Available at <http://www.temple.edu/isllc/newfolk/rhps1.html> [Accessed 23 May, 2012].
McClary, S., 1994. Constructions of Subjectivity in Schubert’s Music. In P. Brett, E. Wood, and G.C. Thomas, eds. 2006. Queering the Pitch, 2nd ed. New York: Routledge, pp. 205-34.
Michaels, S. and Evans D., 2002. Rocky Horror: From Concept to Cult. London: Sanctuary Publishing Limited.
Moretti, F., 2000. The Way of the World: The Bildungsroman in European Culture. London and New York: Verso.
Peraino, J.A., 2006. Listening to the Sirens: Musical Technologies of Queer Identity from Homer to Hedwig. Berkeley and Los Angeles: University of California Press.
Purdie, S., 1999. Secular Definitions of Ritual: The Rocky Horror Phenomenon. In: S. Levy, ed. 1999. Theatre and Holy Script. Portland: Sussex Academic Press, pp. 171-90.
Robbins, B. and Myrick, R., 2000. The Function of the Fetish in The Rocky Horror Picture Show and Priscilla, Queen of the Desert. Journal of Gender Studies, 9(3), pp. 269-80.
Ruble, R., 1987. Dr Freud Meets Dr Frank N. Furter. In: D. Palumbo, ed. 1986.  Eros in the Mind’s Eye. Westport, CT: Greenwood Press, pp. 161-8.
Russo, V., 1987. The Celluloid Closet: Homosexuality in the Movies. Revised ed. New York: Harper & Row.
Shepherd, J., 1987. Music and Male Hegemony. In R. Leppert and S. McClary, eds. 1987. Music and Society. New York: Cambridge University Press, pp. 151-72.
Siegel, M., 1980. The Rocky Horror Picture Show: More than a Lip Service. Science Fiction Studies, 7(3), pp. 305-12.
Studlar, G., 1989. Midnight S/excess: Cult Configurations of ‘Femininity’ and the Perverse. Journal of Popular Film & Television, 17(1), pp. 2-14.
Stuff, 2010. Rocky Horror creator slams Glee. Stuff.co.nz, [online] (Last updated 5:00 A.M. on 3 December 2010) Available at: <http://www.stuff.co.nz/entertainment/tv/
	4416144/Rocky-Horror-creator-slams-Glee> [Accessed 31 October 2011]. 
Wood, R.E., 1991. Don’t Dream It: Performance and The Rocky Horror Picture Show. In J.P. Telotte, ed. 1991. The Cult Film Experience: Beyond All Reason. Austin: University of Texas Press, pp. 156-66.
Walser, R., 1993. Running With the Devil: Power, Gender, and Madness in Heavy Metal Music. Hanover, NH: University Press of New England.
Whittaker, J.. 1998. Cosmic Light: The Birth of a Cult Classic. Altoona, PA: Acme Books.
Wollmann, E.L., 2006. The Theater Will Rock: A History of the Rock Musical, from Hair to Hedwig. Ann Arbor: The University of Michigan Press.
Zoller Seitz, M., 2010. Fly, Ryan Murphy! Be Free! Slant Magazine, [online] Available at: <http://www.slantmagazine.com/house/2010/10/fly-ryan-murphy-be-free/> [Accessed 31 October 2011].
List of Figures


Figure 1: “Dammit, Janet,” first bridge, from 00:08:33. All musical examples transcribed by the author. Obviously, the transcriptions cannot convey the singers’ vocal timbres, so the reader is encouraged to watch the 25th Anniversary DVD edition of the Show (which includes both “Superheroes” and “Once In A While”). The timings are from the U.K. Version.




Figure 2: “Over at the Frankenstein Place,” first chorus, from 00:14:59

Figure 3: Donny and Marie Osmond, “I'm Leaving It (All) Up To You”
      

Figure 4 The Rocky Horror Picture Show (Jim Sharman, 1975). Heading to the wedding bower, Frank is dressed in women’s clothing and stands on the bride’s side of Rocky, whose rippling muscles certainly signify masculinity. But who is the bride? 

      

Figure 5: “I Can Make You a Man,” refrain, from 00:41:13
      

Figure 6 The Rocky Horror Picture Show (Jim Sharman, 1975). 
      

Figure 7: “Wise Up,” interjection, from 1:12:23
      

Figure 8: “Rose Tint My World,” first bridge, from 1:18:04



          i	 The author wishes to thank Haley Reale, Ewelina Boczkowska, René Rusch, Nadine Hubbs, Andrew Nardone, Jena Root, Daniel Stevens, and James Wierzbicki for their generous support and useful insights.
          ii	 The harmonic vocabularies of both “Sweet Transvestite” and “Brown Sugar” are contained within a system of building major triads on the notes of a minor pentatonic scale.  See Everett (2004) and Biamante (2010) for further explanation of this emblematic progression, as well as examples of the countless rock and roll songs that use it.
          iii	 Credit goes to Andrew Nardone for so crisply describing Frank’s behavior.
          iv	 Folklorist Liz Locke (1999, p. 2) refers to 'I'm Going Home' as Frank's 'Judy Garland swan song.'
          v	 The filmmakers have remarked that the last few songs were intended to highlight Frank’s loss of control. Peter Robb-King, make-up artist for the Show, had difficulty getting the wet make-up they had used to run in the pool sequence, which ruined the effect they were going for, which was to have Frank’s messy make-up symbolize his deterioration (Michaels and Evans 2002, p. 234). Writer Jim Whittaker also indicates that in the initial stage production of the show, 'Wild And Untamed Thing' 'was performed extremely fast to emphasize the loss of Frank’s control' (1998, p. 47).  For more on issues of control in the Show, see Ruble (1986) and Kilgore (1986). 
      	Additionally, Raymond Knapp (2006, pp. 250-1), one of the few writers to examine the music in the Show, demonstrates that 'Time Warp,' more than simply being a vehicle for Riff Raff to state his need to maintain control in the face of the strangeness at the house, incorporates the idea of the mastery of control over strangeness in the chord progression of the chorus: bVI—bIII—bVII—IV—I incorporates a number of non-diatonic chords through the controlled procedure of strict descending fourths.
          vi	 In a manner quite different from Shepherd, but worthy of note, Cusick analyzes the vocal timbre of Eddie Vedder, lead singer for the band Pearl Jam. His 'harsh, forced timbre' that 'strains to compete' with the distorted guitars performs several aspects of masculinity by actively disallowing cultural demands and disciplines to penetrate his body (1999, pp. 34-6).
          vii	 Although Frank initially mounts Brad, which mirrors the earlier scene with Janet, the scene cuts away with Brad being fellated, and there is no specific indication in the released film that other sexual acts took place. Brad’s borders remain secure. 
          viii	 Brad’s singing is a serial victim of the film’s final edit, as he had also originally had his own solo verse in “Over at the Frankenstein Place.”
          ix	 It is curious that, even though Russo cites Rocky Horror as an important landmark in queer film history, he fails to include a single character from the film in his necrology.
          x	 Shock Treatment (Jim Sharman, 1981), the sequel to Rocky Horror, provides a few answers as to what happens after Riff Raff and Magenta depart for their home planet, although the film is of a completely different style. Denton, Brad and Janet’s fictional hometown, is depicted as a television studio to critique modern cultural obsession with celebrity. The couple, now married, is having relationship problems, as Brad has difficulty conforming to his new life as a suburbanite/studio audience member. Yet the film makes it clear that the television studio lifestyle is to be rejected and celebrates Brad and Janet’s escape at the end; Bildung is achieved. 
            xi	 Replicating the film’s set design on the program would not have been difficult, since 20th Century Fox owns the rights to both Glee and the Rocky Horror Picture Show.
            xii	 Finn's exaggerated performance of a perplexed Brad is a particularly clear reference to his filmic counterpart. 
---------------

------------------------------------------------------------

---------------

------------------------------------------------------------

A Sheep in Wolf's Corset--33











Intoning A Man--33











Intoning A Man--33









