Transcribing Musical Worlds, or, Is L.A. Noire a Music Game?
Steven Beverburg Reale
	In many video games, the musical score functions in the manner of typical film scores: once finished, or mostly finished, a game world is adorned with a soundtrack designed to amplify, heighten the intensity of, or provide emotional or ironic commentary on a narrative unfolding in a pre-constructed tableau. Even in games with highly dynamic sound design, interactive audio cues are often intended to respond to decisions or actions originating in the narrative. For this reason, much scholarship on video game music advances strategies for composing accompaniments to branching or indeterminate scenarios in what has traditionally been a fairly linear medium—hence Jesper Kaae’s observation that the challenge for modern game composers is essentially the same one faced by early film composers: “the problem of not knowing when things happen.”1 But framing the video game score this way asserts a primacy on narrative, to which music is applied ex post facto; even in light of Kristine Jørgensen’s conclusions that video games played without sound suffer a marked decrease in usability, it seems obvious that games keep their ontological status qua game when lacking a soundtrack, the same not being true in the case of game music absent gameplay.2 Thus, the release of video game soundtracks, or their arrangement for orchestral performance (such as by the Video Games Live orchestra), necessarily flatten out the interactive element in the video games, removing the uncertainty of when things happen; the music, notwithstanding its origins, ceases to be “video game music” and becomes “music from a video game.” We could therefore read the emergence of the music-game genre as an attempt to grapple with this problematic, unidirectional relationship between games and their soundtracks; the creation of game spaces intimately tied to their audio can be understood as a reaction against the assumption of ludic primacy and musical supplementarity.3
	The Guitar Hero phenomenon seems to be at ground zero for studies of interactive music gameplay.4 Dominic Arsenault explains how the game’s notation abstracts (with surprising fidelity) the experience of a player’s hand moving within a system of frets and strings to its simplified representation among five buttons on the Guitar Hero controller.5 In the same journal issue, Henry Adam Svec submits the process of converting Guitar Hero’s notation into button-presses and strums to a Marxist critique of virtual production and immaterial labor.6 Peter Schulz’s study argues that the games’ metaphorical tablature notation exists in four states of varying affinity to the music it represents, which, in a quasi-Schenkerian manner, serves to familiarize the players with varying levels of the musical structure as they progress from Easy mode to Expert.7  Kiri Miller uses the term “schizophrenic performance” to describe the friction between the rhetoric of live musical creation in Guitar Hero players’ simulated performance and the prerecorded audio that is “realized” through it.8
	Because Guitar Hero has featured so prominently within the ludomusicological discourse, detailed discussion of its core gameplay mechanics is not necessary here. Still, certain key features of the game can serve as a framework for understanding music and gameplay interactions in other titles. As is well described in the works referenced, Guitar Hero features a notational system that resembles, and is metaphorically based on, guitar tablature. As a prerecorded song plays, graphical noteheads, represented by cropped cones corresponding both in location and color to five fret buttons on a guitar-shaped controller, move toward the bottom of the screen on an endlessly-approaching guitar neck (often called the “highway”) (Figure 1). If the player presses the corresponding fret button and strums (by means of a switch on the body of the controller) just as the note reaches the bottom of the screen, the game sounds the associated note in the audio; failing to correctly respond to the note results either in a screech (as though the guitar were mis-strummed) or the melody dropping out of the recording.

Figure 1: Still from Guitar Hero III: Legends of Rock (Activision, 2007) 
	Since one purpose of Guitar Hero is to simulate the act of performing music, it makes sense that its graphic design, while abstracted, is intended to simulate a real-world musical notation. Nonetheless, the underlying process is not limited to representations of guitar performance, and I distill it to four abstract features. In Guitar Hero, there exists: 1) an ideal musical object (here, a prerecorded rock song); 2) a visual representation of the ideal musical object (the highway tablature); 3) a means by which the player can interact with the visual representation of the musical object (buttons on the guitar controller correspond to oncoming notes in the highway tablature); and 4) a means by which the game communicates success or failure in realizing the ideal musical object (the soundtrack either plays or omits notes from the prerecorded song). These features provide a starting point for exploring how other games allow their players to interact with their soundtracks. 
*	*	*
	The BIT.TRIP series of music games, released on the Nintendo Wii but later ported to PC, makes a good launching point to abstract the concept of performance in music games. The six games tell a story about the creation and life of a super-hero figure, “Commander Video”; BIT.TRIP BEAT (Gaijin Games, 2009), the first of the series, represents his genesis. The player controls a paddle on the left side of the screen that may be moved up and down; the game's titular “bits,” imitation low-resolution pixels, hurtle from the right and must be deflected using the paddle. The game’s retro aesthetic, with an archaic graphical style and chiptune soundtrack, self-consciously references early video game titles, particularly Pong (Atari, 1972) and Breakout (Atari, 1976), both of which are given explicit homage in two of the game’s boss sequences. But while there is a degree of randomness in those games—indeed, part of their challenge is to anticipate where the ball (actually a square) will be as it returns to the paddle—the patterns of bits in BEAT are predetermined by the game designer and are exactly the same on each playthrough (the only exception to this is, notably, during the Pong and Breakout homage sequences). The bits are what Fares Kayali calls “sound agents,” or “playful widgets that exist aurally and also visually as interactive gameplay elements.”9 Deflecting a bit sounds a melodic note in the level's soundtrack, while missing one sounds a tone resembling a tennis ball being struck. 
	BIT.TRIP’s designer, Alex Neuse, describes that his intention for BEAT is to suggest that no person (or superhero) can always perform optimally without rest; the idea is implemented through BEAT’s three modes: “Nether,” “Hyper,” and “Mega.”10 Levels begin in Hyper mode by default (Figure 2A), and by successfully deflecting enough bits, the player can move into Mega mode (Figure 2B), where the timbre of the cues of deflected bits changes to a smoother, square-wave sound as contrasted with Hyper mode’s sawtooth, and successive combinations of accurately-deflected bits is rewarded with score multipliers. Mega mode also features an increase in visual effects: explosive particle effects accompany deflected bits, the word “Great” appears each time a deflected bit reaches the opposite side of the screen, and the text indicating the accumulated score and current multiplier, listed in the upper and lower borders of the screen, bleeds into the game field. While the player has the opportunity to earn more points in Mega mode, the game’s visual design increases the likelihood that the player will miss too many bits, returning the mode to Hyper.
	When the player misses too many bits in Hyper mode, the game descends to Nether mode (Figure 2C). Resembling Jørgensen’s “degraded usability” of muted gameplay, in Nether mode most of the visuals drop out (the paddle, bits, and meters are the only things that remain), the color palette flattens to a white foreground with black background, and the music ceases playing; the sole sound in Nether mode is a flat, monotone beep when the paddle deflects a bit. Nether mode makes BEAT’s homage to early Atari gaming most explicit; its simulation of the limited audio and graphical capabilities of early video games provide the strongest resemblance to Pong. Neuse reports that he intended Nether mode to be not so much a punishment for poor performance in Hyper mode (although the removal of color and the ongoing soundtrack seems to have that effect) but as an opportunity for the player to rest and recuperate while playing the game without audiovisual distractions. Should the player miss too many bits in Nether mode, though, the game ends.
      The simple, predictable bit patterns with which the game begins give way to complicated and disorienting ones: one pattern, approximately two-thirds through the game’s second level, sends the bits toward the player in an incredibly confusing pattern that deceptively suggests that the paddle should move in the wrong direction (Neuse refers to this pattern as “the gates of hell”). In actuality, the correct paddle motions are much smaller and simpler than the wild bit oscillations imply. At the same time, as the game progresses, visual design in the stage backgrounds become more graphically intensive, their colorful images distract the eyes away from the onslaught of bits. Once the player learns the correct motions and begins to ignore the visual distractions, the passage becomes simpler to complete. Through practice, muscle-memory, and memorization, the player learns how to respond to (or to ignore!) the on-screen stimuli, and what emerges is a realization that this is not a game of Pong at all, but an abstracted—and problematized—version of the Guitar Hero experience: an abstracted bit notation accompanies a pre-composed soundtrack, and the game rewards successful deflections with a kind of rhythmic descant to the ongoing score. But whereas Guitar Hero provides a predictable, if challenging, notation for the player, whose goal (tweaked by the use of star-power) is ideally the perfect realization of its tablature, BEAT’s notation provides distracting, disorienting visual disturbances that the player must learn to negate in order to perform well.

Figure 2: BIT.TRIP BEAT stills. (A) Hyper mode, (B) Mega mode, and (C) Nether mode.

 	The fourth game in the series, BIT.TRIP RUNNER (Gaijin Games, 2010) is a rail platformer; Commander Video constantly runs to the right of the screen, accompanied by a prerecorded soundtrack, and the player can make him jump, duck, kick, or block to avoid oncoming obstacles; musical cues reward successful actions while a failure to avoid an obstacle resets the level.11 Additionally, Commander Video can collect gold and power-up items. As an additional reward for collecting all gold pieces in a single level, the game offers a retro bonus level, and by collecting the power-up items, the level’s mode increases by one step (in this game, the modes are “Hyper,” “Mega,” “Super,” “Ultra,” and “Extra”), the player earns a score bonus, and, more importantly for our purposes, the music's orchestration intensifies.12
	In contrast to the abstract level design of BEAT, RUNNER’s platforming levels have a more concrete geography to them. The levels are preconstructed collections of what might be thought of as “obstacle motives,” recurring patterns of groups of obstacles, such as steps to be ascended, gaps to be leapt over, and narrow squeezes to duck beneath (See Figure 3). Not only do individual levels feature returns of these motives, but they develop and recapitulate them, so to speak, in later ones as well. And since each obstacle is associated with a particular kind of audio cue, recurring musical motives accompany recurring obstacle motives. The return and variation of each of these obstacles serve as formal markers, a role amplified by the audio’s reiterations of the corresponding musical cues.

Figure 3. Stills from BIT.TRIP RUNNER. In (A), Commander Video approaches the obstacle motive in m. 5 of the transcription in Example 1. In (B), Commander Video has just collected the power-up item in m. 13, whose explosive remnants still shimmer on the screen.  In (C), Commander Video leaps from the springboard in m. 30.

      To clarify how this works, see the transcription of Level 1-9, “Beat Deposits,” in Example 1. The bottom three staves represent the ongoing soundtrack while the upper staff represents cues that sound when Commander Video either collects gold (the grace note cues) or successfully negotiates an obstacle. Occasional ossia measures appear when Commander Video collects an upgrade, and the transcription here assumes that all upgrades are collected, meaning that the texture and accompaniments in the lower three staves change at the point where the upgrades are collected. If the upgrade is not collected, the musical texture would remain as it is in the preceding measures, introducing a degree of indeterminacy not reflected in the transcription.13 Vertically aligned with the transcription is a map of the level (since musical notation is not to temporal scale, neither is the map; in-game, each beat occupies a fixed horizontal distance while here, beats in the level design are shifted in coordination with those in the notation).
	Aligning the map with the score transcription helps to clarify how obstacles combine to create obstacle-motives; how the repetition of obstacle-motives combine to create obstacle-phrases, and how the phrases combine to create larger formal structures, complete with a kind of motivic return and development we might expect in a musical passage. The opening of the level (mm. 1–9) repeats an obstacle motive four times: Commander Video must leap to collect a piece of gold, kick through a crystal, and then leap onto a raised platform and over a pile of rubble; at the same time, the audio repeats an accompanying musical motive. Then, the level introduces a new motive: Commander video leaps over a pile of rubble, ducks through a narrow passage, then leaps to collect gold (mm. 11–14). The music accompanies this new obstacle motive with a new musical motive, but in the second iteration, Commander Video must also collect a power-up item, necessarily modulating the orchestration. After skipping up a staircase (m. 15), the paths branch: to follow the upper path, Commander Video must leap from platform to platform (collecting gold on each one), while following the lower one requires ducking under a UFO and leaping over an obstacle (mm. 16–20). The next section (mm. 21–30) involves leaping over gaps in the ground and ducking under UFOs to arrive at a springboard that the player uses to leap over a very large gap and collect a gold piece. This passage repeats a second time but with new orchestration, as Commander Video collects another power-up positioned at the first springboard. The level next reiterates its opening motive and then fragments the preceding passage, sounding only the springboard motive in a rapid, three-fold succession, the last of which is rewarded by a cascade of gold collection (mm. 31–37). 
      As a text, RUNNER offers complex, seemingly contradictory implications with respect to the issue of ludic vs. musical primacy. On the one hand, as Alex Neuse, the principal game designer, remarked: “Ideally, we would get the music first, and then we would design the levels to basically dance with that music.” Sometimes real-world logistics did not always make that possible, but even in situations where the gameplay was designed first, it was always subject to revision in order to better fit the musical score. On the other hand, the game’s visual cues (represented by level geography) is probably more immediate to the player’s success than are its audio cues: indeed, gameplay is not excessively hampered when the sound is turned off, but it would be nearly impossible to play relying on the audio alone. Even though it might seem that the obstacles function as formal generators for the coherent passage of music, we can conclude that the level design here features a musically-organized geography rather than a geographically-organized music. 
      
Example 1: Transcription plus map of BIT.TRIP RUNNER, “Beat Deposits” 
*	*	*
      Dyad (right square bracket left square bracket, 2012) resembles cylindrical shooters such as Tempest (Atari, 1981) and Gyruss (Konami, 1983), although enemies are not merely obstacles to be avoided or destroyed but require various kinds of interaction to meet the disparate goals of each level. For example, in an early level, racing on the lowermost surface of a cylinder, which can be rotated clockwise or counterclockwise, the player creates eponymous dyads by “hooking” (selecting) two enemies of a matching color, thereby earning a speed boost that both shortens the time it takes to reach the goal and increases the risk of colliding with the enemies. Music plays an important role in Dyad, as the levels are examples of what Fares Kayali calls “active scores[, which] are a dynamic form of representation that can be modified in real time by a player, who consequently triggers musical change” (120). Different interactions within the level are associated with specific audio cues—hooking enemies creates a tone, collecting a power-up item adds a musical layer, striking obstacles causes the soundtrack to stop and play in reverse, and acceleration increases the tempo. The specific ordering of the level’s events, which are unique to each playthrough and virtually unrepeatable, realize its dynamic soundtrack; the game’s composer, David Kanaga, cited the aleatoric compositional philosophies of John Cage’s student Christian Woolf as highly influential on the game’s musical aesthetic.14
	In one of the game's later levels, “A Subliminal Reprise” (the title puns on that of an earlier level with a similar conceit, “Observations on the Beautiful and the Sublime”), a depleting “life energy” meter limits play-time: when the meter reaches zero, the level ends. At the start of the level, life energy depletes by about one percent per second but the rate slowly increases over time. To survive, the player must collect invincibility power-ups—through the duration of invincibility, the rate of life energy depletion is halved, and the player can replenish some life force (beginning at about 20 percent, but decreasing as the level progresses) by colliding with an enemy. The game designer, Shawn McGrath, described the level as symbolizing the inevitability of death through the implementation of a “swarm mechanic,” which he describes as featuring a prototypical survivor who must keep at bay hordes of attackers (be they zombies, insects, or aliens) for as long as possible even though the swarm will eventually overtake the protagonist, and he offered Pac-Man (Namco, 1980) and Asteroids (Atari, 1979) as examples.15
	The level incorporates three mechanics: first, hooking a pair of enemies creates a “zipline” between them, which the racer can ride to increase its speed. Second, by selecting an enemy and navigating closely enough to it, the player can charge a “lance” that, when used, gives a short speed boost and allows the player to charge through enemies, replenishing some life energy in the process. Third, by collecting the invincibility power-up, the player can slow the depletion of life energy and, as with the lance, allow collisions with enemies to replenish it. The level consists of a randomly generated collection of four kinds of items: yellow enemies, pink enemies, green “lance-extender” enemies, and invincibility power-ups. Figure 4 is a still taken during a period of non-immunity: the racer (in purple near the bottom-middle of the screen) has hooked two yellow enemies, creating a dyad between them and is riding along the created zipline. Zooming past at the upper left is a lance-extender, and in the distance, several yellow and pink enemies approach. The player, unable to interact with all of the presented items, must choose, quickly and strategically, which will confer the highest benefit, and the level generates its music procedurally on basis of those choices.

Figure 4. Still from Dyad, “A Subliminal Reprise”

      The level's audio, which is dynamic and changes adaptively based on the level conditions, can be divided into two parameters: score and cues.16 The cues are feedback responses to the player's interactions with the level’s sound agents—some of these are listed in Table 1—while the score is the ongoing musical accompaniment for a particular level condition, and Table 2 lists some possible conditions with their associated scoring loops. Notice in particular that the loop signaling impending death is both atonal and irregular in meter; these aspects intrude upon both the soundtrack’s stable A-minor tonality and the regular 4/4 groupings of all of the other loops and cues, intensifying the affect of impending death. The level’s limited raw materials offer the possibility for combination and recombination in nearly limitless ways: it would be virtually impossible for a player to exactly recreate a playthrough and so it is concomitantly unlikely that the level's audio could ever be realized in the same way on multiple occasions. Still, some characteristics are likely to occur in various playings: a relatively quiet, fast-paced beat begins the level punctuated by chirps, flutes, and reeds; over time, distorted tones occupy a pronounced position in the texture, which are replaced by a ringing motive and cessation of the bass beat during sections of invincibility. A crescendoing snare drum signals the impending end of invincibility, which is articulated by a reverberating cymbal crash and return of the bass drum beats. Over time, cacophonous, distorted strings in irregular meters swell, reminiscent of The Beatles' “A Day in the Life.” The stop-time chimes of invincibility temporarily keep these at bay, but eventually they overtake the entire texture. The screen goes white and the noisy strings loop until the player presses a button to either retry the level or quit. Example 2 represents the audio that would accompany a (highly simplified) hypothetical playthrough, and is annotated with the specific player actions that trigger musical changes.
      
Table 1. Some events and their associated cues in “A Subliminal Reprise.”
Table 2. Some conditions and their accompaniments in the score of “A Subliminal Reprise.” 
Example 2. Hypothetical audio to a playthrough of Dyad, “A Subliminal Reprise.”

	Example 2 is rather unsatisfying. It is rather short and notates a spectacularly bad performance on the part of the player, but its main problem is in being unable to really capture the indeterminacy of the gameplay. Yet, systematically transcribing one playthrough, such as that of “Beat Deposits” in Example 1, would hardly be much better—even though it would be longer and more detailed—because it would still fail to capture the sense that the score is unfolding dynamically. This is precisely why, when I explained the present project to McGrath, he objected to the very idea of transcribing the game’s music into musical notation and insisted that “the notation for Dyad’s music … is its game”; I am inclined to agree with him on this point, only appending Tables 1 and 2 to serve as a symbolic key, much like the graphic notation that Penderecki supplies for his score to Threnody for the Victims of Hiroshima (1961).
*	*	*
	The previous analyses have begun from the standpoint that certain games reward their players for skillful play with audio signals. By assigning certain cues to success and others to failure, the players can either recreate an ideal musical object, as occurs in Guitar Hero and BIT.TRIP, or, through judicious decision-making in Dyad, realize an aleatoric musical composition. What these examples have in common is the suggestion that the levels themselves become a form of abstracted musical notation. When the player correctly responds to the game stimulus, the correct musical cues sound; when the player fails to correctly respond to the stimulus, incorrect, or less ideal musical cues result. By skillfully reading the game-world “score,” the player performs the intended composition. 
What happens if we apply this schema—game world as musical score—to a title that few people would consider a music game? Rockstar Games's L.A. Noire (2011) adopts the open-world sandbox formula used in their well-known Grand Theft Auto series for their take on the cinematic mode of film noir. 
      The game’s protagonist is Cole Phelps, a World War II veteran turned police officer making his way through the detective ranks at the L.A.P.D. During a typical case, Cole drives through an open-world representation of Los Angeles to investigate crime scenes for clues and to interrogate any persons of interest; the goal of each mission is to either solicit a confession or uncover enough information to charge a suspect. Both Cole's investigations and interrogations make ludic use of musical cues. During an investigation, a moody, atonal theme on piano, muted brass, string bass, and vibraphone—resembling modernist tropes in some 1950s, second-wave noir scores—plays as Cole walks through the crime scene.17 When he approaches a potential clue, a three-note chime sounds on the piano to attract the player's attention (Figure 5).
      
Figure 5. Cue in L.A. Noire investigation sequences signaling that Cole is near a potential clue.

When the investigation is complete and Cole has found all the relevant clues, or when Cole walks too far from the crime scene, the investigation theme ceases playing, signaling to the player to either return to the area or to move on with the case.
	During the interrogation sequences, Cole can select avenues for questioning based on the clues found at the crime scene and must decide whether he believes the suspect’s answer to be true, doubtful, or, if he has collected contradictory evidence, a lie. The musical cues in the interrogation sequences have a tremendous impact on the experience of playing L.A. Noire. There are several elements: first, strings play a droning C#-major triad throughout the entire interrogation; each time Cole chooses a correct response, the drone increases in volume. Second, each time Cole makes a response, one of two brief atonal cues sound, depending on whether the response was correct: the first features two ascending fifths, with the last note harmonized as part of an [014], while the second begins with the same ascending fifth, but is followed by a major third and a descending semi-tone, while strings enter the texture with tritones and a major seventh (Figure 6).

Figure 6. Cues when Cole responds to suspect's statements correctly (A) and incorrectly (B).

It is significant that both cues open with the same two tones. The player, having been trained throughout the game as to which is the correct motive, must wait for the third pitch in order to know whether he or she has selected correctly; this anticipation heightens the tension of the encounter in a way that mere textual feedback would not. At the same time, the C#-major drone offers a symbolic role: amidst an angst-ridden, atonal score, the persistence of a major triad suggests that the light of truth is emerging from the darkness and corruption surrounding Cole’s cases. The effect on the player is pronounced: in an exceptionally successful interrogation, the chord even begins to drown out the dialogue.
	Because the goal of the interrogation encounters is to respond correctly to each of the suspect's statements, and because doing so has a particular musical result for which the player has been trained throughout to listen, we can understand the interrogation sequences themselves as containing an ideal musical composition that the player, through correctly responding to the suspect's statements, performs. The musical score for a generic three-question interrogation sequence is given in Example 3. While Cole deliberates about the response he will give, the strings drone on their C#-major chord. Each time Cole provides a correct response, the score takes the lower branch and the game sounds the “correct” cue and increases the dynamics of the string drone. Each time Cole provides an incorrect response, the score takes the top branch, cuing the “incorrect” motive without affecting the volume of the string drone. Simply put, the ideal musical performance of the interrogation sequence is represented by the lower branches of Example 4, while a non-ideal performance will make a detour along at least one upper branch.

Example 3. Branching score for a hypothetical investigation in L.A. Noire.

*	*	*
	Notwithstanding the existence of an ideal musical object in its interrogation sequences, L.A. Noire is probably not best described as a music game.18 However, the sound design of these sequences shares the same musical logic with the other games in this study, albeit in a very abstracted manner. We can now return to the model advanced at the outset of this talk to explore how these disparate games relate (See Table 3). Perhaps not surprisingly, BEAT and RUNNER fit the Guitar Hero model best. Both games feature ideal musical objects (even if Neuse does not necessarily intend for the player to realize them perfectly); visual representations of the ideal musical object (a near one-to-one correspondence between obstacle structure and musical structure in RUNNER, or anti-representations, in the case of BEAT’s fiendishly deceptive bit patterns); a means of interacting with the visual representations (deflecting bits in BEAT; negotiating obstacles in RUNNER); and a means by which the games communicate success or failure in realizing the musical object (collision with an obstacle in RUNNER triggers the level to reset; missing too many bits in BEAT decrements the mode until the game ends when Nether is failed). 
      More surprising, though, is that L.A. Noire is also a very close fit: the level design, in this case the interrogation sequence, features an ideal musical object, a visual (but also aural) representation of the ideal musical object (the spoken interrogation dialogue and Cole's detective notebook, his log of all clues and locations pertinent to the case that helps the player decide which option is correct), a means by which the player can interact with the representation of the musical object (buttons mapped to the options “Truth,” “Doubt,” and “Lie”), and a means by which the game communicates success or failure in realizing the ideal musical object: failure follows the upper path of Example 3 and success the lower. The subject's statements create the musical score for the interrogations; Cole's responses to them create the performance.  
      By contrast, Dyad departs tremendously from the Guitar Hero model: there is no ideal musical object, but rather a multiplicity of acceptable musical objects, and therefore, the game visually represents (and offers a means of interacting with) not an ideal musical object, but rather the possibility of all acceptable musical objects. Moreover, since the goal of “A Subliminal Reprise” is to play for as long as possible without allowing life energy to reach zero, success or failure in the level hinges not on how the musical object is realized, but only on its duration.
      
Table 3. Performative comparison of Guitar Hero, BIT.TRIP BEAT, BIT.TRIP RUNNER, DYAD, and L.A. NOIRE

	Guitar-shaped peripherals are not required for a game's music to be intractable from its gameplay; it probably does not even need an active score or a foregrounded soundtrack. Even in the most ostensibly cinematic video games, the interaction of the game world with its audio invite the possibility that playing the game is playing its music. This way of thinking would allow us to consider the skilled, practiced gamer as a kind of virtuoso; or the practice of making tool-assisted videos, where a sequence of keystrokes is fed into an emulator to create inhumanly perfect—and often stunningly beautiful—playthroughs, or, their opposites in the fan-created levels of Super Mario World that send the title character careening through a precisely-arranged course of blocks, enemies, and power-ups and compose their reactive audio cues into extended musical compositions, as examples of the kind of machinic virtuosity (to borrow Svec’s term) implemented by Conlon Nancarrow in his compositions for player piano.19 Games keep score by tabulating and evaluating a player's ability to accomplish its tasks, but when game worlds and musical scores collide, we might consider the idea of “player performance” literally: that the playthrough becomes—more than a measure of skill—a kind of expression to be judged aesthetically. 
1	Jesper Kaae, “Theoretical Approaches for Composing Dynamic Music for Video Games,” in From Pac-Man to Pop Music: Interactive Audio in Games and New Media, ed. Karen Collins (Hampshire, England: Ashgate, 2008), 85.
2	Kristine Jørgensen, “Left in the Dark: Playing Computer Games with the Sound Turned Off,” in From Pac-Man to Pop Music, 175.
3 	Video game genre can be a thorny issue and has been explored in other work, including Mark J.P. Wolf, “Genre and the Video Game” in The Medium of the Video Game, ed. Mark J.P. Wolf (Austin: University of Texas Press, 2001), 113-34 and Thomas H. Apperley, “Genre and Game Studies: Toward a Critical Approach to Video Game Genres,” Simulation & Gaming 37/1 (March 2006): 6-23. It is outside the scope of the present article to thoroughly delineate the genre of “music game,” so for the present purposes, I use the term to describe any video game that foregrounds player interaction with the soundtrack as a primary feature of gameplay.
4	Guitar Hero (Harmonix Music Systems, 2005) saw several sequels and a spinoff in Rock Band (when the development company split from its publisher). For simplicity, I use the title Guitar Hero as a catch-all for its later incarnations. 
5	Dominic Arsenault, “Guitar Hero: ‘Not Like Playing Guitar At All’?” Loading… Journal of the Canadian Gaming Studies Association 2/2 (2008): n.p.
6	 Henry Adam Svec, “Becoming Machinic Virtuosos: Guitar Hero, Rez, and Multitudinous Aesthetics,” Loading… Journal of the Canadian Gaming Studies Association 2/2 (2008): n.p.
7	 Peter Schulz, “Music Theory in Music Games,” in From Pac-Man to Pop Music, 177-88.
8	 Kiri Miller, “Schizophrenic Performance: Guitar Hero, Rock Band, and Virtual Virtuosity,” Journal of the Society for American Music 3 (November 2009): 395-429.
9	 Fares Kayali, “Playing Music: Design, Theory, and Practice of Music-based Games” (Ph.D. dissertation, Technische Universität Wien, 2008), 102.
10 	Interview with author, September 21, 2012.
11 	In this respect, RUNNER references modern “endless runner” games like Canabalt (Adam Saltsman, 2009) as well as older side-scrollers, such as the famous “Turbo Tunnel” sequence in the NES game Battletoads (Rare, 1991).
12	Each of the various BIT.TRIP games draw from the same set of modes, all of which have spondaic names. As is similarly the case with BEAT’s Nether mode, RUNNER’s retro bonus levels preserve the basic game mechanics but degrade the graphics in an homage to the classic Atari 2600 title, Pitfall (Activision, 1982) while monotone bleeps replace the richer musical accompaniment of the regular levels.
13	 In a similar manner, the use or non-use of star-power in Guitar Hero does not impact the player’s ability to earn 100% completion in a song. An additional feature of indeterminacy in RUNNER: the cues for successfully-negotiated obstacles (as opposed to the collection of power-ups or gold, and excepting the springboard, which always sounds C5-G5-C6) are actually randomly selected from a set of pitches: F4, G4, A4, C5, E5, F5, G5, A5, E6, F6. Therefore, this transcription represents only one of a very large set of possible successful playthroughs.
14 	Interview with the author, August 8, 2012. In this respect, Dyad resembles Rez (Sega, 2001), a game that has attracted some scholarly attention, and Svec’s description of the latter’s gameplay describes the former rather well: “[O]stensible, the primary objective in Rez is to defend the avatar, not to execute digital paradiddles or flans. Still, an infinitely complex, improvisatory musical work develops as one plays the game” (n.p.). Similarly, in a paper presented at the 2012 meeting of the American Musicological Society (and forthcoming in the book The Oxford Handbook of Film Music Studies, Neil Lerner observes “an aleatoric and minimalistic quality to the rhythmic surprises of Pong’s [(Atari, 1972)] severely limited pitch collection” of “a B<flat> each time the paddle (represented on screen with a rectangle) hits the ball (a small square), a B<flat> an octave lower each time the ball strikes the wall, and a B a half step higher each time the ball makes it past a paddle and scores a point.” See “The Origins of Musical Style in Video Games, 1977–1983” in The Oxford Handbook of Film Music Studies, ed. by David Neumeyer (Oxford University Press, in press).
15 	Interview with the author, August 8, 2012.
16	See Karen Collins, Game Sound: An Introduction to the History, Theory, and Practice of Video Game Music and Sound Design (Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press, 2008), 4 for discussion of dynamic, nondynamic, interactive, and adaptive music in video games.
17	 The author is grateful to Christopher Coady for assistance locating L.A. Noire's score within the musical traditions of film noir.
18 	Interestingly, in my interviews with them (cited above) both Shawn McGrath (creator of Dyad) and Alex Neuse (creator of BIT.TRIP) even disputed the classification of their own works as “music games.” In large part, both designers specifically wanted to distance their games from those like Guitar Hero.
19	 One classic, and highly impressive, tool-assisted video featured a simultaneous playthrough of Mega Man X and Mega Man X2 using the exact same set of keystrokes (DeHackEd, “SNES Mega Man X & X2 (USA v1.1) in 41:41.43,” TASVideos, http://tasvideos.org/380M.html (accessed June 10, 2013)). The video hilariously amplifies reviews that criticized Mega Man X2 for being too similar to Mega Man X. User “agwawaf” upped the ante by adding Mega Man X3 to the mix (adwawaf, “SNES Mega Man X & Mega Man X2 & Mega Man X3 (USA) '300%' in 43:51.02,” TASVideos, http://tasvideos.org/1894M.html (accessed June 10, 2013)). For a stunning example of a fan-created Super Mario World level that automatically generates music, see http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=sUcpML7KuKI (accessed June 10, 2013).
---------------

------------------------------------------------------------

---------------

------------------------------------------------------------

18










