Barriers to Listening in World of Warcraft
Steven Reale 

      It is a well-rehearsed cornerstone of postmodern literary theory that texts are inherently unstable. “All literary works,” Terry Eagleton reminded us in 1983, “are ‘rewritten,’ if only unconsciously, by the societies which read them; indeed there is no reading of a work which is not also a ‘re-writing.’”1 Of course, Eagleton is not claiming that literal words on literal pages are changing in some substantial way, but rather highlighting the fact that today’s cultural values and the meanings that we assign to utterances are quite different from those in, say, Elizabethan England. I may never be able to access quite the same constellation of meaning from Shakespeare’s Sonnet 18 as might the poet’s contemporary, my colleague in the English department, or you, dear reader, but I can at least be reasonably confident that the words that appear in my anthology of poetry do so in the same order and with the same punctuation and line breaks as they do in yours. Even if the poem is an unstable text, its notations are fixed in place. Indeed, our ability to engage in scholarly discourse at all generally relies on our agreement that we are studying the same object.
	In general terms, we can make the same observation about a musical work as we can a poem—from a certain perspective, texts are texts irrespective of their medium. Yet scholars have noted that a thornier complication emerges in trying to even locate the musical text, or to determine what even constitutes a musical work.2 Few writers would claim that the musical score independent of performance fully encapsulates the work. Nattiez, for example, notes that the semiology of Western art music requires an extra interpretive step between its poiesis and realization—that being the role of the performer.3 Nicholas Cook takes up this thread in his recent volume that reimagines music scholarship from the standpoint of performance studies, specifically destabilizing the role of the score in its contribution to musical discourse and advocating for a closer alignment music with the related medium of theater.4 In a radical case, Carolyn Abbate and Roger Parker began their volume A History of Opera by announcing in its preface that they decided “at a very early stage ... that this history would contain no musical examples,” because they “wanted to write a book without reference to musical scores.”5 In the case of music, then, the work cannot be taken to be either stable or fixed, even if there exists some Urtext that fixes some of its parameters—and Stanley Boorman has even cautioned us against implicitly trusting that an Urtext serves as an unimpeachable document of textual authenticity.6 Nonetheless, only the fussiest of musical ontologists would reject as dysfunctionally imprecise a statement like, “I have tickets to see the symphony perform Beethoven’s Eroica this evening.” As with poetry, Beethoven scholars must be able to agree on the stability of at least some aspects of their object of study in order to engage in any discourse on it.
	The genre of the Massively Multiplayer Online Role-Playing Game (MMORPG), by contrast, represents texts in systemic flux. World of Warcraft (Blizzard, 2004–), is perhaps the best-known title in the genre, having at its peak boasted 12 million concurrent subscribers. The game was such a cultural phenomenon that it was featured both in a Toyota advertisement as well as in an episode of the television series South Park (1997–). Since the game’s original release, Blizzard has added seven expansions, each of which substantially changes not only the geography of the game—presenting around a half dozen new zones and several handfuls of new dungeons to explore—but also many rules governing gameplay. The game requires a persistent internet connection, and all players, regardless of whether they have purchased the expansions, are subject to these gameplay changes. This is significant: I can be confident that if I replay the original The Legend of Zelda (Nintendo, 1986) in 2019, the game will be exactly as it was decades ago, just as I am that when I reread Sonnet 18 in 2019, it will feature the same words in the same order with the same punctuation and line breaks as it does now.  Today’s World of Warcraft, however, is a substantially different game than it was is 2004. In fact, owing to the August 2018 release of its seventh expansion Battle for Azeroth, World of Warcraft is a substantially different game as I make the final edits to this essay than when I completed its first draft—and with the planned release of the version 8.1 content patch in November 2018, will almost certainly be different still by the time these words are published. Much writing on video game music has focused on its indeterminacy: in a manner very different from film scores, whose soundtracks play out the same way from viewing to viewing, a characteristic feature of video game music is that its soundtracks may never be heard twice in exactly the same way.7 The score to World of Warcraft is then even less stable than what might be called the “possibility spaces” established by dynamic video game scoring techniques: a game subject to frequent renewal and revision, music that once frequently accompanied a player’s journey through the land of Azeroth might never be heard in game again.
	This essay focuses on barriers that prevent players from listening. The first part of the essay lays out a theoretical framework for how such barriers operate, with interspersed, autobiographical examples of my own experiences of them as a World of Warcraft player. I categorize these barriers as either synchronic or diachronic, where the former exist at a specific moment during the game’s lifespan, and the latter emerge when patches and expansions alter the game. The second part of the essay takes a meta-diachronic approach, showing that even the diachronic analysis of the first section begins from a synchronic standpoint, and describes how the very nature of diachronic barriers to listening to World of Warcraft are in flux. The essay then concludes by drawing comparisons to World of Warcraft’s diachronic barriers to those that appear in media beyond the MMORPG. Though perhaps unexpected, it may be that diachronic barriers to experiencing artwork are far more common than we may first assume, and, by extension, that the MMORPG represents a far more normative mode of storytelling than we may imagine.
***
      I played WoW predominantly during the “Burning Crusade” era, roughly 2007–2008, in which players spent the bulk of their time on another planet known then as Outland. At the time, I found myself spending a lot of time in the Terrokar Forest zone. I imagine that I was in the minority of players for doing so: after all, it lacks the beautiful vistas of nearby Nagrand, and there are few important resources to gather. Instead, it was designed as a low-level area in which players would spend a brief amount of time before outleveling it and moving on. With the exception of a hub of dungeons in the southern expanse, there was not much reason for a player to return and even less to linger. But I kept returning and I kept lingering, because I found myself obsessed with a fragment of the zone’s musical accompaniment: a dreamy organ elegy that reminded me of some of my favorite pieces by Messiaen: Le Banquet Céleste (1928), for example, or the first movement of L’Ascension (1933–1934) (See Example 12.1).  

Example 12.1: Excerpt from “Terrokar Forest” scoring. World of Warcraft: The Burning Crusade (Blizzard, 2007). All transcriptions by the author with minor simplifications.

Part of the enjoyment of playing an MMORPG arises from the unstructured freedom in how players may spend their time. Some might race to the maximum level and begin progressing through the game’s most difficult dungeons—encounters that might require the coordinated efforts of several handfuls of players to complete; others might roam the world of Azeroth amassing a collection of exotic in-game pets; still others might spend their time in competitive Player-vs.-Player (PvP) combat in the game’s arenas and battlegrounds. During these quiet visits to Terrokar Forest, I was choosing to spend my in-game time—time that I was paying for at the rate of $15 per month!—just listening to the game’s non-diegetic score. The game’s incentive structure was pushing me towards higher level, more rewarding zones; that structure itself was a barrier to my ability to continue listening to some music that had captivated me.

Synchronic and Diachronic Barriers 
The nature of the MMORPG is such that virtually no player will be able to experience all of the available game content: a barrier, then, is anything that prevents a player from experiencing content. Although this essay is specifically focused on the game’s music, the concept could be extended to any parameter of the game experience. These barriers can be represented on a two-dimensional framework with a temporality axis on the one hand and a permeability axis on the other. The temporality axis indicates whether a barrier is synchronic or diachronic, where, broadly speaking, synchronic barriers exist within the structure of a game at a particular moment of gameplay while diachronic barriers emerge over time as patches and expansions alter that structure.8 The permeability axis indicates whether a barrier is fine or coarse. Fine barriers represent hard-coded limitations, whereas coarse barriers represent incentivization structures that discourage players from experiencing content that is otherwise available.
	A synchronic barrier is any game mechanic present during a moment of playthrough that restricts, hinders, or disincentivizes a player from experiencing game content that is theoretically accessible during that playthrough. The permeability of a synchronic barrier, then, is a function of a player’s degree of agency in choosing whether to cross it. On the one hand, a fine synchronic barrier exists when a player wishes to experience content but is prevented from doing so; while on the other, a coarse synchronic barrier exists when some content is freely accessible to the player but he or she does not wish to experience it. In practice, a barrier will fall somewhere between these two extremes, and in the various scenarios outlined in Table 12.1, there is likely some degree of player choice—to purchase a new computer system, for example, or to dedicate time to improving their skills as a player.9 	
FinerPlayer’s computer does not meet system requirements of most recent expansionPlayer has not purchased most recent expansionPlayer not skilled enough to experience encounterPlayer has not yet had enough time to experience encounterPlayer not skilled enough to complete a prerequisite encounterPlayer has not yet had enough time to complete a prerequisite encounterCoarserPlayer deems encounter unrewarding and chooses to engage in some other activity
Table 12.1: A spectrum of hypothetical synchronic barriers from the perspective of a player who owns a game for which a recent paid expansion features a particular encounter.
      
      Synchronic barriers are not unique to the MMORPG genre or to World of Warcraft in particular; they are features of virtually all video games. Given advances in technology, a computer built in 2009 will likely not be able to run a game released in 2019, nor is it reasonable to expect that a PlayStation 3 will be able to run a game released for the PlayStation 4. The Dark Souls franchise of games (Namco Bandai Games, 2011–2018) is famous for its punishing level of difficulty that demands countless hours of skill refinement from its players to succeed—many players, including this author (and his co-editor!), abandon the titles without finishing. Many other games, such as The Legend of Zelda: Breath of the Wild (Nintendo, 2017) are packed with optional side content (cooking, treasure hunting, city building, etc.) that the player can skip without missing the essential gameplay experience. Of these examples, Dark Souls represents finer barriers while Breath of the Wild represents coarser ones.
***
      In 2008, I was a member of a modest guild focused on Player-vs.-Environment (PvE) encounters. On the one hand, this meant that I spent almost no time participating in PvP content; on the other hand, it also meant that I was not embedded in a group that was able to advance through the entire progression of end-game dungeons. While I chose to spend a lot of time listening to the music in Terrokar Forest, I also chose to spend little to no time listening to any of the martial strains that sound in the game’s PvP battleground zones; my lack of interest in this aspect of the game became a coarse synchronic barrier to hearing this scoring. Similarly, my guild’s limitations in skill and available time prevented us from progressing past the first couple of raiding tiers. There was thus a fine synchronic barrier that prevented me from hearing the music that accompanied the battle against the demon Kil’jaeden, the final enemy of the Burning Crusade era.
***
      In contrast with synchronic barriers, which are common in many video games, diachronic barriers are a quintessential feature of MMORPGs like World of Warcraft. The nature of the game’s revenue model requires that the studio develop and release content on an ongoing basis to encourage players to continue paying a monthly subscription fee. Since the game’s 2004 release, each of the expansion packs have added new regions for players to explore—but, especially in one high-profile case, expansions may also remove previously existing content. With the release of the game’s third expansion, Cataclysm (2010), the designers reshaped the world of Azeroth in accordance with the expansion’s premise that a dimensional rift wreaked geological disaster upon the land. One resulting change was the radical transformation of the zone Thousand Needles. In the game’s initial release, the zone existed as a desert of spires resembling the dramatic landscapes of southern Utah; after the cataclysm, the zone flooded, and what had been the ground upon which countless players quested for countless hours is now an ocean floor well beneath the surface (See Fig. 12.1). 
a)
b)
Figure 12.1: The Thousand Needles zone: (a) before and (b) after Cataclsym
      
      As I mentioned above, this is a remarkable situation, because even players who choose not to purchase an expansion are subject to an ever-changing synchronic game state. Even if they wanted to, players cannot revisit the old Thousand Needles zone (at least, not through official channels). Thus, the release of Cataclysm creates a fine diachronic barrier to experiencing the Thousand Needles in its original form.
***
      One of my earliest memories from playing World of Warcraft was the experience of entering Orgrimmar, the capital city of the orc race, with whom I had chosen to ally. Up to that point, my low-level questing had taken place in remote, sparsely populated areas. The day that I ventured to the city for the first time, recall I glimpsing the city’s imposing stone barbican from afar, and when I finally approached and crossed its threshold, I was greeted with a musical cue featuring low brass and a martial drumbeat (see Ex. 12.2). When I entered the city and saw a vast number of other players going about their business, I began to grasp just how unimaginably large the number of my fellow adventurers was, and it gave me goosebumps. Even after countless visits to Orgrimmar, this cue became intimately associated with that first experience of entering the city. I was surprised, then, to enter Orgrimmar after the cataclysm, and to learn that the entrance cue had been rescored: the new music still features the warlike drums and horn, but whereas the older cue had been clearly in B-flat minor, the new version is replete with tritones and chromatic inflections that obscure a clear tonal center (see Example 12.3). While the reimagined theme is effective at capturing the Horde’s bellicose nature, and the original music can still be triggered at other locations within the city, I found myself missing the punctuation of my arrival into Orgrimmar with the familiar entry music; a fine diachronic barrier has been erected, and I no longer have access to that experience.
 
Example 12.2: Entrance to Orgrimmar cue, World of Warcraft original release.

Example 12.3: Entrance to Orgrimmar cue, post-Cataclysm
***
      If a fine diachronic barrier emerges when Blizzard removes content from the game, then coarse diachronic barriers arise when new content is released that eliminates the incentive to experience older content that may still be nonetheless present. A primary reason this might happen is because each expansion features two broad categories of content: leveling content, which players move through to gain levels, and endgame content designed for players who have attained the maximum level for that particular release. A player may spend a week or two leveling and the next year or two at max level; since the vast majority of the gameplay experience will thus be at the level cap, the game designers need to develop a considerable amount of endgame content to incentive players to continue subscribing.
      Table 12.2 lists all of the endgame zones as they appeared at the end of the original World of Warcraft content cycle and all of the high-level zones as they appeared at the end of The Burning Crusade. There are two noteworthy aspects: first, three of the eight new high-level zones (nearly 38%) were designed with the end-game experience in mind, a sensibly large percentage if your players could attain maximum level in several weeks but you want them to continue p(l)aying for the entire 23 months that the Burning Crusade cycle lasted. Second, the first new high-level zone, Hellfire Peninsula, was designed to be experienced by characters as low as level 58. This meant that players new to the game during the Burning Crusade era would likely spend minimal time in the five endgame levels of the game’s original release. 
Additionally, when The Burning Crusade was released, Blizzard adjusted the rate at which characters level, allowing them to move from level 1 to 60 considerably faster than they could before. The upshot of all of this is that players new to World of Warcraft would have few if any ludic reasons to experience, say, the Silithus zone, and thus to hear the dissonant, insect-inspired ambient accompaniment therein. The release of The Burning Crusade rendered this important end-game zone obsolete, and its geographical remoteness created a strong disincentive to journey out to it. As it was still available in-game, however, determined players could still experience it if they wished. Thus, the release of The Burning Crusade created a coarse diachronic barrier to listening to the Silithus music.
Level RangeZone NameZones as they appeared at the end of:53–60Eastern PlaguelandsWorld of Warcraft53–60WinterspringWorld of Warcraft55–60Deadwind PassWorld of Warcraft55–60MoongladeWorld of Warcraft55–60SilithusWorld of Warcraft58–63Hellfire PeninsulaThe Burning Crusade60–64ZangarmarshThe Burning Crusade62–65Terokkar ForestThe Burning Crusade64–67NagrandThe Burning Crusade65–68Blade's Edge MountainsThe Burning Crusade67–70NetherstormThe Burning Crusade67–70Shadowmoon ValleyThe Burning Crusade70Isle of Quel'DanasThe Burning Crusade
Table 12.2: High-level zones in World of Warcraft and The Burning Crusade

      The entire preceding discussion is summarized in Figure 12.2. The fine diachronic barrier is represented by Kil’jaeden; the coarse diachronic barrier by the Eye of the Storm battleground; the fine synchronic barrier by the gates of Orgrimmar; and the coarse synchronic barrier by the infested wastelands of Silithus.10
Figure 12.2: The entire barrier complex. From left to right, top to bottom: the demon Kil’jaeden; the gates of Orgrimmar; the Eye of the Storm battleground; and the wasteland of Silithus.

Complications and Barrier Flux
During the final stages of revising this document, I flew my character outside the gates of Orgrimmar and spotted some tents that were not usually there. As I approached them, some music played that I had not heard in over a decade (see Ex. 12.4). In fact, I had completely forgotten that this polka existed, and yet the moment it began playing, accompanied by the sounds of drunken goblin chatter, it was as though I were transported back in time. Brewfest, the in-game version of Oktoberfest, had arrived! Every September, a set of beer-related quests and events become available and then a week or so later disappear. Clearly, this represents a fine diachronic barrier to listening, but I was stunned to learn as I researched the polka and prepared my transcription that this tune only plays outside of Orgrimmar. The Alliance has a completely different polka that plays at their Brewfest celebration. I had never heard that music before, nor knew that it even existed. In addition to the fine diachronic barrier that restricts players from hearing this music in-game save for one week per year, I learned that there is also a coarse synchronic barrier that prevented me, because of my allegiance to the Horde, from hearing or knowing of the Alliance’s Brewfest music. The lesson here is that identifying barriers to listening is often more complex than categorizing them into a single quadrant of the diagram in Figure 12.2.

Example 12.4: Excerpt from the Brewfest polka, hordeside
***
      The barriers of Fig. 12.2 all exist within the frame of the game, but it is important to note that even its diachronic barriers have been explored from stable synchronic moments—those being predominantly the state of the game at the end of the Burning Crusade and the beginning of Cataclysm. The nature of diachronic analysis, though, means that insights gleaned at one synchronic moment may be false at others. Indeed, to my considerable amusement—after choosing in the initial stages of this research to adopt the Silithus zone as my archetypal coarse, diachronic barrier, not only did Blizzard release a set of endgame quests for Legion that took place in the zone, but the very first quest of Battle for Azeroth requires the player to journey there. In addition, like Thousand Needles in Cataclysm, the zone was fundamentally changed: after completing the final raid of Legion, players view a cinematic in which the demonic titan Sargeras plunges his massive sword into the zone; healing the resulting wound becomes one of the central conceits of Battle for Azeroth (see Figure 12.3). Unlike Thousand Needles post-cataclysm, there is a way of revisiting the older version of the zone: a non-player character will allow the player to “travel back in time” to see Silithus as it was before Sargeras’s strike. Thus, in addition to diachronically falsifying my statement about the obsolescence of Silithus, this example serves as evidence of a philosophical change on Blizzard’s part to seek ways of eliminating, rather than erecting, barriers to content. This is a sensible move, for it would be a shame for Blizzard to design so much content and to subsequently prevent players from experiencing it. The remainder of this essay, then, will detach the study of barriers to listening from a singular, diachronic, in-game moment. It will consider not only the ways in which barriers change diachronically, but also ways that barriers may be circumvented from outside the game’s diegesis, and ultimately how the nature of the barriers themselves are subject to diachronic changes to the designers’ gameplay philosophies for World of Warcraft. 

Figure 12.3: The blade of Sargeras’s sword and the wound of Azeroth now occupy the location of the insect mound in Figure 12.2. 

      There had been a longstanding problem with the game’s endgame dungeons (called raids), in that they require the cooperation and skills of potentially dozens of players to complete perhaps dozens of prerequisite encounters to even enter them. The musical scoring for these events would then seem to be locked away, accessible only to an elite minority of players. This was never exactly so, but it is much less true today than it was a decade ago. To begin with, since the game arose during a period of widespread internet access, that very same internet access became a means by which players could research important information about the game outside of the frame of its gameplay. Indeed, websites such as wowhead.com are an important tool for players studying game mechanics, featuring a wealth of detailed data concerning optimal ways of assigning stats or selecting gear; suggestions for efficiently leveling both the character and its secondary skills (e.g., how to quickly and inexpensively increase skill in cooking, or how to find specific recipes that feature a strong synergy with other aspects of the gamer’s playstyle); and, importantly, strategies for defeating end-game enemies. Although it may seem like “cheating” to consult a guide on defeating a monster rather than to learn its weaknesses through gameplay trial and error, in practice it is considered poor form to arrive at a high-level raid without having studied its encounters in advance.11 Raiding takes time and organization, and it is wildly inefficient, on the one hand, for a raid leader to have to explain how an encounter should work while everybody is assembled in-game; or on the other, for an ill-informed neophyte to make an error that ultimately causes the group to fail the encounter and have to restart it from the beginning. Thus, out-of-game research is not just encouraged by the community, in many ways it is essential, and since video footage of the encounters is available on WowHead and YouTube, anybody may experience World of Warcraft content in at least a second-hand way. Moreover, since gameplay footage can be found from as early as the game’s initial release, external sources become a way for interested parties to “peer over” boundaries both synchronic and diachronic. Furthermore, watching top raiding guilds complete these difficult encounters can be a form of entertainment in and of itself. On September 19, 2018, the guild Method was the first in the world to defeat the final boss at the highest difficulty setting on of the then-current raid, Uldir, and reportedly, over 260,000 viewers watched the feat on a TwitchTV livestream.12 
      Still, there is a fundamental difference between viewing content on YouTube and experiencing it in game, so Blizzard began to soften fine synchronic barriers over the course of individual content cycles. For example, the Kil’jaeden fight may have been extraordinarily difficult upon its initial release during the Burning Crusade, but Blizzard eventually retuned the encounter, decreasing its difficulty so that more players would have the opportunity to experience it (a diachronic softening of a fine synchronic barrier). This was among the first of many such moves toward increasing player accessibility to the end-game raid dungeons. The most difficult World of Warcraft raids were designed for 40 players to complete. Noting the logistic difficulty of organizing such a large group of people, Blizzard eliminated 40-player dungeons from their design language and instead designed two tracks of raids for the Burning Crusade: one set of dungeons for groups of 10 players, and another for groups of 25 players. In Wrath of the Lich King, Blizzard designed each raid dungeon so that it could accommodate groups of either 10 or 25 players, with the 10-player raids being less difficult to complete. As a result, greater numbers of players could experience in-game content that had previously been inaccessible. In the current iteration of the game, Blizzard now offers four tiers of difficulty, ranging from a version that can be completed by unorganized groups of players, known as pick-up groups (PUGs), to the world-class “mythic” setting, mentioned above; and rather than being tuned for specific player counts, most of these tiers scale to accommodate various group sizes. Blizzard’s strategy, then, is to soften even the finest synchronic barriers of the game, creating opportunities for virtually any motivated player to cross them.
      As we have seen, a diachronic study of barriers itself implies that the very nature of the barriers themselves are subject to change over the course of the game’s lifespan. Boundaries that were once synchronous may become diachronous, and vice versa. For example, players who choose to align themselves with the game’s Horde faction will almost certainly hear an entry cue for Orgrimmar, but a player who chooses to align with the Alliance faction might never set foot in it at all and thus never hear its entry cue. The opposite is also true: a truly dedicated Horde player may never visit the Alliance capital Stormwind City and thus may never hear its musical accompaniment. In these cases, a player’s choice—which faction they will play—establishes a coarse synchronic barrier to hearing music that is heard frequently by players of the opposing faction. What was once, then, a coarse synchronic barrier to hearing the original Orgrimmar entry cue becomes a fine diachronic barrier in Cataclysm.
	At the end of The Burning Crusade, the Kil’jaeden encounter, even after retuning, still required a certain degree of organization and ability to complete. Upon the release of later expansions, however, as players elevated their characters far beyond the level cap intended for this encounter, it became considerably easier—so much so that, though originally designed for a 25-player group, it could be completed by a single player.13 At the same time, any rewards for defeating Kil’jaeden have by now been long rendered obsolete. As was (up until recently) the case for the Silithus zone, the only reason to visit Kil’jaeden now would be to engage in a kind of “end-game tourism,” to experience artifacts of previous iterations of the game, in much the same way that Dana Plank has shown earlier in this volume that modern tourists might find themselves fascinated with ancient Egypt. Thus, what was previously a fine synchronic barrier over time may become a coarse diachronic barrier.
      But even changes like these are not necessarily stable. The most difficult dungeon that existed before the release of The Burning Crusade, Naxxramas, represented a considerably fine synchronic barrier. This encounter, requiring the coordination of 40-players, was considered to be one of Blizzard’s finest pieces of game design up to that point, and yet due to its difficulty and the long, complex sequence of prerequisite encounters, only a small fraction of players got to experience it. When the company designed the third expansion, Wrath of the Lich King, they reused the dungeon as an introductory raid experience, showcasing with it their new design philosophy of presenting raid dungeons in both 10-player and 25-player versions, and allowing most of its player base a chance to experience what has been described as “the absolute pinnacle of old WoW raiding.”14 In so doing, they removed the original, 40-player dungeon from the game, rendering it permanently inaccessible. Thus, charting the barriers to listening to the eerie music of Naxxramas, citadel of the undead, reveals a complicated path through this essay’s two-dimensional framework. The fine synchronic barrier to Naxxramas gave way to a coarse diachronic barrier upon the release of The Burning Crusade, when players’ elevated stats lessened the difficulty of the dungeon.15 Upon release of Wrath of the Lich King, however, a fine diachronic barrier to the original 40-player experience was erected (as it was removed from the game); and a new fine synchronic barrier was established for the new version of the dungeon, though, one considerably softer than in its original iteration. Finally, as new expansions were released and the level cap continued to rise, the barrier once again became coarse and diachronic.
	A third way that these barriers change over time might be termed “diachronic reinstatement,” where Blizzard either restores access to content that had been removed or reincentivizes experiencing content that had previously been rendered obsolete. In the latter case, during the game’s fifth expansion cycle, Blizzard created a “timewalking” mode, in which players could explore lower-level dungeons with their character’s stats being artificially scaled down to restore the intended level of challenge (e.g., a level 100 character might have their abilities decreased to those of a level 70 character). At the same time, loot earned during these encounters would be scaled up so as to be appropriate for the character’s actual level. This system thus encourages players to explore older content, lowering some coarse diachronic barriers that may have developed over time.
	One aspect of diachronic reinstatement is particularly pertinent for the present discussion. During the game’s fifth expansion, Warlords of Draenor (2014), one of the central conceits was that each player would build and customize a unique garrison that serves as their base of operations. Though all Horde garrisons are located in one place and all Alliance garrisons in another, the game employed what Blizzard called “phasing,” so that when players enter the garrison zone, they would only see and interact with their own instance of it. The garrison system represented Blizzard’s response to fans who had long been asking for player housing, and it allowed each player to customize their home base to their liking. One significant way players could customize their garrison was by building a jukebox that would allow them to play music from rolls they could collect out in the world, considerably lowering some boundaries to listening, but not all. The music from Terrokar Forest does not appear on a music roll; if I want to hear it in-game, I still need to travel to Outland to do so.
	Finally, on November 3, 2017 Blizzard made a stunning announcement: for many years, fans had been clamoring for the opportunity to revisit and replay World of Warcraft as it existed before the release of The Burning Crusade. During a now notorious 2013 Blizzcon event, a fan asked the development team if they would ever consider releasing a legacy server, and J. Allen Brack, World of Warcraft Production Director, replied: “No. And you don’t want that either. You think you do, but you don’t.”16 Many people did, however, as evidenced by the numerous unofficial legacy servers that arose to fill that demand. The largest, Nostalrius, boasted 800,000 accounts (150,000 of which were active) in a press release written after they acquiesced to a cease-and-desist order request from Blizzard.17 Ultimately, though, in part due to subsequent conversations with the lead developers for Nostalrius, Blizzard decided to develop official legacy servers.18 When these servers are released, players will once again have official access to game content that has been unavailable for many years. The fine diachronic barriers to the original World of Warcraft experience will be lifted: Hordeside players entering Orgrimmar will once again be greeted by the old cue; and players at the level cap will once again have a good incentive to listen to Silithus’s haunting ambience, to experience the zone as it existed more than a decade ago.


Conclusion
      I recently wanted to revisit the original Star Wars trilogy, so a friend loaned me his DVD box set. As the trilogy came to an end, I was looking forward to hearing a song that I had loved as a child—the Ewok celebration that closed Return of the Jedi. I was surprised to discover the ending was substantially revised in a way that incorporated and resolved the storylines of Episodes 1–3, and that the entire sequence featured a brand-new musical accompaniment. As lovely as the sequence was, I was mildly disappointed; a fine diachronic barrier to listening had appeared in a beloved work.
***
      While synchronic barriers to listening (and to experiencing other content) are not uncommon in video games, MMORPGs bring a second kind of barrier to the forefront. This barrier emerges—sometimes intentionally, other times as a by-product—when new content is released that supersedes, obsoletes, or replaces older content. Diachronic barriers might even be described as a defining feature of the genre. Nonetheless, as my experience viewing Star Wars will attest, they are not limited to the MMORPG. One straightforward way this occurs is when content creators release revised editions of works that abridge or otherwise remove material that existed in previous editions. Those of us responsible for authoring, reviewing, or selecting textbooks for the college classroom are well aware of these kinds of changes. A particularly noteworthy example of this kind of diachronic barrier occurred with the game The Legend of Zelda: Ocarina of Time (Nintendo, 1998): in the initial release, the soundtrack to the game’s fire temple featured some samples of Islamic chanting that were replaced with synthesized sounds in subsequent production runs and in later rereleases.19 Without “peering over the wall,” either by using unofficial emulation software or watching online videos, or else locating what are now rare and valuable first-release cartridges, players who did not acquire the original version of the game may no longer be able to hear the music as originally released. In another example, which is by now becoming a predictable experience, during the final stages of editing this book, Nintendo released a new edition of the original Legend of Zelda making some substantial quality-of-life changes to the original release, thereby diachronically falsifying a claim I made in this essay’s third paragraph.20
	Outside video games, diachronic barriers are becoming more and more common in the world of board games and card games. It has long been a common feature of collectible card games such as Magic: The Gathering (MtG) that publishers will release expansion sets that introduce more powerful cards than what had existed previously, with the effect of encouraging players to purchase more packages of cards to increase their competitive advantage. While this does not necessarily prevent players from using outdated cards, they will struggle when playing against those who are using a current deck—so the release of new cards creates something of a coarse diachronic barrier to using older ones. In some cases, such as with the MtG card “Black Lotus,” the designers become aware that a released card is overly powerful and creates an imbalance to play. While they of course cannot repossess these cards from the players, they can ban their use in official competitive play, creating a fine diachronic barrier to their use.
	The life span of the cooperative board game Pandemic (Z-man Games, 2007) demonstrates two additional examples of diachronic barriers. First, a second edition of the game, featuring updated artwork and components, was released in 2013. All expansions for the game released after that point adopted the new design standards and thus were incompatible with the version of the game at initial release. The publisher did make available a set of updated components for the original version, and it is only through purchasing them that owners of the first printing could cross the diachronic barrier to playing the game’s later expansions. In 2015, Z-Man released a new version of the game entitled Pandemic Legacy: Season 1. The title begins with the basic framework of the original game, but during each of its 12 scenarios, the game changes in fundamental ways: players are directed to open compartments revealing new rules and new components; or to apply stickers to the game board, so that incidents from one playthrough have consequences that permanently affect the subsequent scenarios. Other times, players will be instructed to destroy certain game components, further reinforcing the permanence of in-game events. By the end of the twelfth scenario, the board game and its components will have been fundamentally transformed, and without purchasing a new set, players cannot return to a previous game state. The diachronic boundaries are fine—and firm!—indeed.
	Ultimately, diachronic barriers are considerably more common than we might first imagine. Carol Poster has shown, adapting the insights of Walter Ong, that the experience of playing World of Warcraft, and being an audience to its storytelling, aligns it more closely with ancient traditions of oral storytelling than with what is ultimately a recent and anomalous consumption pattern of media: 

The twenty-first century Homer …  is bound between covers with a fixed shape and sequence, and read silently and privately as part of a literary experience Plato describes as rigidly unresponsive[. …] Homer as experienced in antiquity, on the other hand, like MMORPGs, was social rather than solitary and interactive rather than monological. No two performances of Homeric epic were identical. Just as when gamers replay episodes or entire games, the course of events and length of time required depends on the ways the players interact with the game universe, so audience reactions and performance situations cause oral performers to vary their performances of what they consider the “same” story.21

Though not limited to the MMORPG experience, diachronic barriers nonetheless do constitute a primary essence of that experience, and this allows MMORPGs like World of Warcraft to serve as a catalyst for reminding us of the manner in which works of art may—and often do—change over time. We can be reminded that texts may be unstable not only in the high-theoretical sense in which we understand that they are re-composed every time an audience experiences, or even re-experiences them, but also in an everyday sense. It is possible—even in the age of internet archiving—that we may never be able to access a remembered work in the form it once took. We may grieve such a loss, but maybe we can take comfort in knowing that we do not suffer in isolation: humankind could never really keep a story in a firm grasp.


1 Terry Eagleton, Literary Theory: An Introduction (Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 1983), 12.
2 Lydia Goehr outlines some of the debates in the philosophy of music concerning the nature of the work in The Imaginary Museum of Musical Works (New York: Oxford University Press, revised edition, 2007).
3 Jean-Jacquez Nattiez, Music and Discourse: Towards a Semiology of Music, trans. Carolyn Abbate (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1990), 73.
4 Nicholas Cook, Beyond the Score: Music as Performance (New York: Oxford University Press, 2013).
5 Carolyn Abbate and Roger Parker, A History of Opera (New York: W.W. Norton, 2012), xv.
6 Stanley Boorman, “The Musical Text,” in Rethinking Music, ed. Nicholas Cook and Mark Everist (New York: Oxford University Press, 1999), 403–423. 
7 See Steven Reale, “Transcribing Musical Worlds; or, Is L.A. Noire a Music Game?” in Music in Video Games: Studying Play, ed. Kevin J. Donnelly, Neil Lerner, and William Gibbons (New York: Routledge, 2014), 77–103. 
8 The terms of this axis—synchronic vs. diachronic—are borrowed from Ferdinand de Saussure, and are particularly apt for a study of games, as he uses the analogy of a chess match to exemplify these forces as they apply to language. Ferdinand de Saussure, Course in General Linguistics, ed. Charles Bally and Albert Sechehaye (New York: Philosophical Library, 1950): 88–9.
9 Naturally, the ability to make such choices is itself a function of certain kinds of socio-economic privilege.
10 Below, this essay considers ways that Blizzard’s design philosophy has evolved in order to reduce or eliminate barriers to experiencing content: as an example of one such change, the sixth expansion, Legion (2016), zones now scale along with the player’s level. This means that there is now less of a distinction between leveling zones and endgame zones, and players will now continually be incentivized to return to all of the main zones of a content release. 
11 Of course, someone must have figured out these strategies in the first place: the general pattern is that the top guilds in the world will be the first to experience newly-released encounters. These guilds will undertake the encounters without foreknowledge and through some trial and error will determine a workable strategy. This information is then disseminated through forums and video footage that other players may study in preparation for their own encounters. Much of this data gathering and dissemination occurs while forthcoming content is undergoing public beta testing, so that by the time an encounter reaches the live servers, it is already widely documented by the player base.
12 See Wowhead, “The Viewer Impact of Streaming the World First Mythic Uldir Race” (accessed 27 September 2018), https://www.wowhead.com/news=287311/the-viewer-impact-of-streaming-the-world-first-mythic-uldir-race.
13 The footage of the solo encounter by YouTube user HeelvsBabyFace at https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=42xAe-JXg7U not only provides a great example of this, but his commentary touches upon many of the issues of diachrony discussed here (site accessed 27 September 2018). Today, where the level maximum is 40 levels higher than it was when the encounter was released, it is so trivial that after I took the screen capture for Figure 12.2, I was able to defeat the demon in about seven attacks, while taking no damage myself.
14 See Matthew Rossi, “Wrath of the Lich King Retrospective: Naxxramas,” Engadget.com (3 June 2010; accessed 27 September 2018), https://www.engadget.com/2010/06/03/wrath-of-the-lich-king-retrospective-naxxramas/.
15 But by no means was Naxxramas easy for a level-capped player during The Burning Crusade. See discussion thread: http://www.wowhead.com/forums&topic=8478/how-many-for-naxx-70 (accessed 27 September 2018).
16 See transcription of the event: http://wowwiki.wikia.com/wiki/BlizzCon_2013/WoW_Q_%26_A_About_Almost_Everything_panel (accessed 27 September 2018).
17 Nostalrius, “Nearly One Million Gaming Accounts Lost in Legacy Server,” 2016. https://en.nostalrius.org/pr1.pdf (accessed 27 September 2018). 
18 Chris Bratt, “World of Warcraft Classic: We ask Blizzard our Biggest Questions,” Eurogamer.com (April 11, 2017; accessed 27 September 2018) https://www.eurogamer.net/articles/2017-11-04-wow-classic-blizzard-answers-some-of-the-big-questions.
19 A long-standing rumor that the change was made due to outcry by the Muslim community seems to have been debunked. See Gametrailers, “Pop Fiction: Season 1: Episode 9: The Fire Temple Chants [Update 2]” (accessed 27 September 2018), https://youtu.be/U34MFcJdGCo. 
20 Andrew Webster, “The Nintendo Switch just got a much easier version of the original NES Zelda,” TheVerge.com (October 10, 2018; accessed 28 October, 2018) https://www.theverge.com/2018/10/10/17959040/nintendo-switch-online-legend-of-zelda-nes-special-edition.
21 Carol Poster, “Walter Ong’s World of Warcraft: Orality-Literacy Theory and Player Experience,” First Person Scholar (12 October 2016; accessed 27 September 2018) http://www.firstpersonscholar.com/walter-ongs-world-of-warcraft/.
---------------

------------------------------------------------------------

---------------

------------------------------------------------------------




12


